Students who miss four labs at any point in the semester, any combination of excused or unexcused absences, will receive an F in the course.*Attendance is required for this class.Missing even one class means that you have missed a significant portion of the course.DO NOT schedule any other appointments or activities during the time that you are scheduled to be in lab.Missing labs with a valid excuse: A valid excuse is one that is written, verifiable, and covers the date and time of your scheduled lab class. Oversleeping and job conflicts do not constitute acceptable excuses. Missing a lab with a valid excuse allows you to make-up the lab provided that you contact your lab instructor within 48 hours of the absence. If you know in advance that you will miss a lab with a valid excuse, contact your GLA before the lab for reassignment to another lab period. Make-up assignments are due within one week of the missed lab and may include any or all of the following: completing the lab with a different section, submitting homework, quizzes, or any other assignment associated with the missed lab, or by completing an alternate assignment designated by the GLA or course instructor. Students who fail to complete the make-up work within the allocated time will not receive credit for the lab exercise. You are responsible for all material and data presented and gathered in lab. Please note that any missed lab for a valid excuse will still be marked as an excused absence, even if you make up the lab in another lab section.Missing labs without a valid excuse: For each lab that is missed without a valid excuse, students will automatically receive a minimum 35-point deduction (this includes points for missed quizzes) from your total lab points; if a lab is worth more than 35 points for that day, you will lose the total number of points for that day. Tardiness and leaving lab early without permission are not tolerated in lab. Quizzes are given during the first 15 minutes of class; if you arrive 10 minutes late you will only have 5 minutes to take the quiz. If you arrive to lab more than 15 minutes late you will be marked as absent without a valid excuse and will not be allowed to take the quiz, but work that is due that day will be accepted and you will be able to stay and complete the lab for the day. If you leave lab early without permission, you will be marked as absent without a valid excuse (even if you have taken the quiz) and will receive a deduction of 35 points from your total lab points.
