Tuesday lecture attendance will be recorded by your completion of the pre-lab quiz, post-lab discussion, and in-person activity. In the event of a documented excused absence (see below), you will be provided with additional post-lab discussion questions to make up for the lack of in-class discussion participation, and you will be expected to arrange getting notes from a peer that was present in class in order to complete the missed activity within 1 week of returning from your absence. You are still expected to complete the in-class activity on eLC quizzes. 
Wednesday and Friday lab attendance is mandatory. Laboratory attendance will be recorded by your lab TA.  In the event of a documented excused absence, you are responsible for obtaining laboratory notes from your lab partners, and using them to write original lab notebook entries within a week of your return to laboratory.  To document your make-up, you are responsible for showing both the notes from your lab partner and your original lab notebook entries based on those results to your TA.  Failure to prepare a detailed lab notebook entry within a week of the absence will result in a loss of 5-10 participation points per absence (10 pt deduction for failing to prepare a lab notebook entry, 5 pt deduction for turning in low-quality work).
Excused absences for lecture and lab will include:  
1. Medical/professional school interviews and University-sanctioned events - the relevant TA must be contacted a minimum of one week prior to the absence; absences for such interviews that are not cleared prior to the absence will not be considered as excused.
2. Illnesses of self or dependent child – requires documentation of physician’s visit or proof of symptoms reported to DawgCheck 
3. Isolation due to testing positive for COVID-19 – requires proof that you reported it to DawgCheck
*note that isolation due to a positive COVID test is required even if you are vaccinated.  Vaccinated individuals with known exposure should get a COVID test if symptomatic.
4. Quarantine due to confirmed exposure to COVID-19 - requires proof that you reported it to DawgCheck
*note that quarantine due to exposure guidelines have changed, see details below in the “Coronavirus information for students” section 
5. Other circumstances beyond those listed above may be considered as excused absences per Dr. Grainy approval – contact must be initiated with your TA and instructors as soon as you know of the conflict, and no later than 1 hr prior to class.
Documenting your absence: If you do NOT provide a documented excused absence to your instructors and the TA– you will NOT receive credit for any missed assignments/attendance/exams. Please e-mail your documentation to jgrainy@uga.edu and Gregory.Whitaker@uga.edu to request an excused absence PRIOR to the absence. Requesting an excused absence after the absence has occurred will only be accepted in an emergency situation in which the student was unable to access e-mail due to the emergency. 
First unexcused absence will be a 10 pt deduction. Second unexcused absence will be a 20 pt deduction from your final grade. Each additional absence will be a deduction of 5% of final grade for each offense.



