Attendance is required for this class. Missing even one class means that you have missed a significant portion of the course. DO NOT schedule any other appointments or activities during your scheduled lab sessions.
Missing labs with a valid excuse: A “valid” excuse is one that is written, verifiable, and covers the date and time of your scheduled lab class. Oversleeping and job conflicts do not constitute acceptable excuses. Missing a lab with a valid excuse allows you to make-up the lab provided that you contact your lab instructor within 48 hours of the absence. If you know in advance that you will miss a lab with a valid excuse, contact your GLA before the lab for possible reassignment to another lab period. Do not simply attend a different section. Doing so without prior approval by your GLA will be marked as an unexcused absence. 
Make-up assignments are due within a time limit agreed to between you and your GLA and may include any or all of the following: evidence that you have consulted with your team members regarding missed work and data, completing the lab with a different section, submitting assignments associated with the missed lab, making up a lab assessment, and/or by completing an alternate assignment designated by the GLA or course instructor.  Students who fail to complete the make-up work within the allocated time will not receive credit for the lab exercise. You are responsible for all material and data presented and gathered in lab. 
Missing labs without a valid excuse: If you do not have a valid excuse for missing a lab, you will not be allowed to make up any work and will automatically receive a minimum of 20-point deduction from your total lab points (even if the lab is “worth” less than 20 points). If a lab is worth more than 20 points for that day, you will lose the total number of points for that day
Tardiness and leaving lab early without permission are not tolerated in lab. If you arrive to lab more than 15 minutes late you will be marked as absent with a valid excuse but will be allowed to hand in work for that lab as well as stay and complete the lab. If you leave lab early without permission, you will be marked as absent without a valid excuse - even if you have completed all work for that day - and will automatically receive a 20-point deduction from your total lab points for that day. 
Assignments are due on the days indicated on the syllabus or by your instructor. Each day that an assignment is late, you will lose 20% of the assignment's total points.
Students who miss THREE or more labs at any point during the semester, even with valid excuses, will earn the grade of an F in BIOL 1107L/2107L. If a student has missed three or more labs due to extenuating circumstances and wishes to avoid a failing grade, s/he should request an Incomplete from Dr. Miller. Note: even if you make up the lab in another lab section with GLA approval, this will be recorded as an excused absence.
