In this course, rather than just memorizing and accepting facts, you will learn to organize concepts and use them to develop a way of thinking about how we know what we know about the natural world. Using realistic scenarios, you will acquire problem-solving skills and learn how Biology relates to your own life.

Understand the differences between simple and complex carbohydrates, saturated, unsaturated fats and cholesterol, and proteins and to be able to use that understanding to recognize a food containing these on a food label.

Be able to design a diet for yourself that follows the recommendations of your doctor for adopting a heart-healthy diet or a diabetic diet.

Understand the differences between bacteria, viruses, and cells like ours, and how drugs can be used to take advantage of these differences to fight infections.

Be able to explain to your spouse or child why antibiotics would be helpful in fighting off some kinds of infections but not others.

Understand how different foods are used by our bodies for energy, and how this changes during exercise.

Be able to evaluate a health claim made by a diet supplement.

Understand how chromosomes and their genes are inherited by offspring, and how parents compare to their children or children compare to their siblings in terms of chromosomes and genes.	Understand the results of a paternity test. Explain why the risk of having a child with some genetic disorders such as Down Syndrome increases with parent age.

Use a pedigree or read information about a family to determine how a gene is being inherited within that family and the chances that the next offspring will carry or express a specific trait.

Explain how and decide on whether you should be genetically tested for a particular trait using your family history and online sites like the Online Mendelian Inheritance in Man.

Understand how you could use DNA genome sequence data to chart the occurrence of color vision in animals.	Explain why it is more likley that one of your male friends is colorblind than one of your female friends.

Understand how DNA is copied.

Explain to a friend how DNA can be used as evidence in a court case.

Understand how DNA is used to make proteins.

Explain how organisms might be genetically modified to have different traits or produce different kinds of proteins. Explain the pros and cons of this technology.

Understand what mutations are and how they can affect a cell.	
Understand the role of genes and the environment in the development of cancer. Help your parent understand the relative merits of two different cancer therapies.

Understand human reproduction and methods to promote and block reproduction.

Predict the date on which a woman is most likely to conceive using information from her menstrual cycle. Decide if you should try a new birth control method for men.

Understand how and why populations change (evolve) over time.

Explain to a family member how antibiotic resistant bacteria arise and what role improper use of antibiotics plays in this process.