TENTATIVE COURSE SYLLABUS
Concepts in Biology
BIOL 1103 Summer Semester 2011
Class Meeting Time: Daily (MTWRF) 10:30-11:30am Classroom: 404E Biological Sciences Bldg.
Professor Contact Information:
Dr. William A. Said
Office Location: 621 Biological Sciences Building Office Hours: By appointment: [Thurs. and Fri. (2:00 - 3:00pm)] Phone Number: 706.542.4800 E-mail: Please use only eLC email account.
Administrator Contact Information:
SPECIALIST, Mrs. Yulonda Davis - Room 403 Biology Undergraduate Instruction Office Phone - 542-1684 E-mail - ydavis1@uga.edu
Textbooks: Recommended as "References" (but NOT Required)
1. "Biology for a Changing World", by Shuster, Vigna, Sinha, and Tontonoz (2012) 2. "Campbell Essential Biology with Physiology", by Simon, Reece, and Dickey (3rd Ed.) 3. "Biology: A Guide to the Natural World", by David Krogh (4th Ed.)
- Some class notes will come from sources other than the recommended textbooks.
Expected Learning Outcomes
A demonstrated understanding of the chemical basis of life, the basic characteristics of life, how energy is transferred from the environment into and through living organisms, and how genetic information is used in organisms.
Lecture Information
You are expected to attend lecture; if you choose to skip class, all missed lecture notes, assessments, quizzes and announcements are your responsibility. Be advised that downloading material from the eLC course website will not provide you with a complete set of class notes and that a significant portion of your final letter grade is based upon performance on in-class quizzes and group learning activities.

Exams/ Grading: There are 100 points available in the course.

 Lecture Quizzes: Three quizzes (all are cumulative) ...

(60 pts.)

 Assessments/ Participation: Surveys, Clickers, 5-min Assessments, etc. (10 pts.)

 Final Quiz (comprehensive) [Friday, August 5th, 2011]

(30 pts.)

- A lecture quiz, assessment or the Final Exam may include "fill in the blanks", "critique",

"sketch", "discuss", "compare and contrast", "calculate", "essay" questions, .... etc.

- Short assessments in the form of 5-min essays, 5-min surveys, clicker questions, scantron

questions, etc. will be administered during most class periods, and your participation will impact

your final grade.

- Lecture quizzes, assessments, and final exam will cover notes given in class and pertinent

information from the recommended textbooks.

- Quizzes are kept by instructor. Some lecture quizzes will be self-graded.

- If you would like to see your graded lecture quiz, you may stop by my office during my office

hours.

Make-up quizzes/assessments: - There will be NO make-ups for missed quizzes or assessments. Documented emergencies (from hospitals, courts, funeral homes ...etc.) will be forwarded to the Students' Dean Office for inspection and verification. In case your documented emergency is verified and approved by the Dean's office, your Final Quiz grade will replace the "0" received as a score for the missed quiz. Final Quiz, as all other quizzes, is cumulative and it includes critical thinking questions. Final Quiz is administered during the official Final Exam day [Friday, August 5th, 2011 at Noon].

Extra credit assignments: - There will be NO extra credit assignments.
Your grades are posted on our web page and updated as soon as they are scored. NOTE: If there is an error with a lab score, contact your TA. If you would like to review a graded lecture quiz, email me and we'll arrange for an office visit.

Final Letter Grade
Your grade in this course is determined by your performance on class tests and assignments. There is no curve. Standard cutoffs are used to assign grades. The grade of an Incomplete is assigned only with the recommendation of the Office of Student Affairs. Any student convicted of academic dishonesty will receive a grade of "F". You must pass both the laboratory and lecture portions of the course in order to pass the course. Those that do not, will receive a failing grade regardless of their total course average. Final letter grade is assigned as follows:

> 90 = A 86.00 - 87.99 = B+ 76.00 - 77.99 = C+ 60.00 - 67.99 = D

88.00 - 89.99 = A80.00 - 85.99 = B 70.00 - 75.99 = C < 60.00 = F

78.00 - 79.99 = B68.00 - 69.99 = C-

OFFICIAL COURSE POLICIES:
Proper conduct in class is a must. If you choose to engage in a conduct that is disruptive to other students, you will be asked to immediately leave the classroom for the remainder of the class period. Repeated improper conduct will result in you facing an administrative withdrawal from class. The following actions will result in automatic application of this rule: using your cell phone for any reason; using a laptop; talking in class for any length of time. Additionally, bringing food or snack to the classroom or to the lab is prohibited. - Students are expected to make a serious and committed effort to learn the material discussed in the course. Preparation in advance of lecture is recommended. It is expected that the student will invest a minimum of three hours of study for each hour of class meeting time. - It is essential that you use eLC, and to check the course's site regularly. Several important aspects of the class are conducted through the web site. For example, "Lecture Recap" (studentauthored)"; "study guides", "Q/A Discussion Board"; your "grades"; and other important announcements will be issued through the web site. - Students are responsible for all relevant announcements made during class and/or course's eLC. Quizzes will be based on material presented in class as well as readings from the textbook.
Students with Special Needs:
Qualified students with disabilities will be provided the necessary academic accommodations if determined eligible by the appropriate disability services staff at their home institution. Prior to granting disability accommodations in this course, the instructor must receive written verification of a student's eligibility for specific accommodations from the disability services staff at the home institution. It is the student's responsibility to initiate contact with the disability services staff and to follow the established procedures for having the accommodation notice sent to the instructor.
Academic Honesty:
The University of Georgia's Office of the Vice President for Academic Affairs provides all students registered at this University with a booklet titled "A Culture of Honesty at the University of Georgia" that specifies the policies to which you must adhere. All academic work must meet the standards outlined in this booklet; students are responsible for informing themselves about those standards before performing any academic work. The link to more detailed information about academic honesty can be found at http://www.uga.edu/ovpi/honesty/acadhon.htm

Summer 2011 BIOL 1103 Daily, MTWRF, (10:30- 11:30am) _404E
Tentative Class Schedule & Reading Assignments

Date

Topic

Textbook Chapter*

"Campbell Essential Biol. With Physiology"

"Biology for a Changing World"

"Biology: A Guide to the Natural World"

June 10

What is Life?

1

1

1

June 13-17 Chemistry and Molecules of Life

2-3

2

2-3

June 20-23 Cells: The Structural and Functional Units 4-5

3

Fri., June 24 Quiz #1

What's life?

June 27- July 1 Metabolism, Energy & Enzymes

5-6

4

6

July 4th

Independence Day

July 5-7

Photosynthesis

7

5

8

Fri., July 8 Quiz #2

Cumulative

July 11th

Withdrawal Deadline

July 11-15 Cellular Respiration: Harvesting Energy 6

6

7

July 18-21 DNA Structure and Replication

10

7

12

Fri., July 22 Quiz #3

Cumulative

July 25-29 Genes to Proteins

11

8

13-14

Aug. 1-3

Intro to Cell Division & Human Genetics 9

9-12 12

Fri., Aug. 5 Final Exam (Noon - 3:00 pm)

Cumulative

(*) Textbooks are recommended, as references, but not required.

This syllabus and the associated schedule provide a general plan for the course. Deviations may be necessary.

