COURSE INFORMATION CONCEPTS IN BIOLOGY (BIOL 1103L)
PRINCIPLE OBJECTIVES OF THE COURSE: Biology 1103L is a one-credit hour course which provides a hands-on exploration of topics
relating to general principles of Biology. This laboratory course is specifically designed for the non-science student. An effort has been made to design labs that are directly applicable to daily life. The corresponding lecture course, BIOL 1103, is a pre-requisite or a co-requisite for BIOL 1103L. The course syllabus is a general plan for the course; deviations announced to the class by the instructor may be necessary.
BIOL 1103L, a Writing Intensive Lab Course, uses an inquiry-based approach in its curriculum. It features cooperative learning and combines the writing process and the scientific process to promote critical thinking skills. Students have the opportunity to design and test their own experiments within a general framework and with guidance from their GLA. The Writing Intensive aspect of this course closely follows the guidelines established by The University of Georgia's Writing Intensive Program (WIP). Our goal in following these guidelines is to help you become better writers in your own non-science academic fields; since writing and thinking are parallel cognitive (learning) processes. Writing engages individuals in the information being studied and therefore results in better retention of this subject material.
Upon completion of this laboratory course, students will gain an understanding of biological macromolecules, bacterial drug-resistance, water quality assessment, molecular genetics and patterns of inheritance. There are several written pre-lab assignments that serve as an orientation to the laboratory topic for the week. Some of the labs involve written homework that is an extension and application of the material covered in the lab exercise.
The course syllabus is a general plan for the course; deviations announced to the class by the instructor may be necessary.
GRADUATE LABORATORY ASSISTANT (GLA) INSTRUCTORS: Graduate Laboratory Assistant (GLA): GLA names, specific teaching assignments, and email
addresses will be posted outside of room 403A and on the 1103L eLC page (https://www.elc.uga.edu/webct/entryPageIns.dowebct). Students are strongly encouraged to take advantage of the opportunity to discuss course material directly with their GLA during office hours.
LAB PROGRAM COORDINATOR: Dr. Kris Miller Office: Room 402, Biological Sciences Building Office Hours: By appointment - email or call Phone: (706) 542-1681 Email: krmiller@uga.edu
BIOSCIENCE LEARNING CENTER: The Bioscience Learning Center (BLC) is located in room 406 of the Biological Sciences
Building. This facility houses computers (both MAC and PC) for use by students enrolled in courses at UGA. All BLC computers are Internet connected. The BLC charges a small fee for printing (6 per page) and photocopying (11 per page) and only accepts Bulldog Bucks for payment. Desk copies of the lab manual, corresponding lecture course text, and photo atlases are on reserve in the BLC for student use. BLC hours are from 8:30 AM - 7:00 PM, Monday through Thursday; 8:30 AM - 5:00 PM, Friday. The BLC is closed on weekends.
MATERIALS FOR LAB CLASSES: You may purchase your 1103 Lab Manual, "Concepts in Biology Laboratory Manual" from the
University Bookstore, Beat the Bookstore, or Off Campus Bookstore.
eLC:

eLC is a web-based course management system used for BIOL 1103L. You will need to use your MyID and password to access eLC. Once you log in, choose BIOL 1103L from your courses listed to access information about this laboratory course (e.g., course syllabus).
DRESS CODE: Your legs must be completely covered (long pants or long skirt). Your feet must be completely
covered (no open-toed or open-heeled shoes). Failure to comply with dress code will result in dismissal from lab and will be marked as an excused absence. You will be given one week to complete a make-up assignment. If the work is not completed in that time, you will have 21 points deducted from your total points for lab.
ATTENDANCE/TARDINESS: *Students who miss four labs at any point in the semester, any combination of excused or unexcused absences, will receive an F in the course.*
Attendance is required for this class. Missing even one class means that you have missed a significant portion of the course. DO NOT schedule any other appointments or activities during the time that you are scheduled to be in lab.
Missing labs with a valid excuse: A "valid" excuse is one that is written, verifiable, and covers the date and time of your scheduled lab class. Oversleeping and job conflicts do not constitute acceptable excuses. Missing a lab with a valid excuse allows you to make-up the lab provided that you contact your lab instructor within 48 hours of the absence. If you know in advance that you will miss a lab with a valid excuse, contact your GLA before the lab for reassignment to another lab period. Make-up assignments are due within one week of the missed lab and may include any or all of the following: completing the lab with a different section; submitting all homework, quizzes, or any other assignment associated with the missed lab; or completing an alternate assignment designated by the GLA or course instructor. Students who fail to complete the make-up work within one week will not receive credit for the lab exercise. You are responsible for all material and data presented and gathered in lab. Please note that any missed lab for a valid excuse will still be marked as an excused absence, even if you make up the lab in another lab section.
Missing labs without a valid excuse: For each lab that is missed without a valid excuse, students will automatically receive a minimum of a 22-point deduction from the lab point total, even if a lab is "worth" fewer points. If a lab is worth more than 22 points, then the full point total for that day will be deducted (this includes the standard 22-point deduction).
Tardiness and leaving lab early without permission are not tolerated in lab. If you arrive for lab more than 15 minutes late you will be marked as absent with a valid excuse; you will be allowed to stay and complete the lab for that day and turn in work due that day. If you leave early without permission, you will be marked as absent without a valid excuse for that class even if you have completed all work for that day and will receive the standard 22-point deduction for a lab missed without a valid excuse.
Assignments are due in class on the days indicated on your syllabus or by your instructor. Each day that an assignment is late, you will lose 10% of the assignment's total point value. Exception: for all pre-lab assignments, work not completed by the stated due date will not be given any credit.
Students who have missed four or more labs due to extenuating circumstances with valid documentation and wish to avoid a failing grade should withdraw from the course or request an Incomplete. After the midpoint in the semester, permission to withdraw must be obtained from Linda Edge (542-3564) in the Office of the Vice President for Student Affairs. Grade appeal options can be found at http://www.franklin.uga.edu/students/student_appeal_guidelines.php
COMMUNICATION: To comply with the Family Educational Rights and Privacy Act (FERPA), all communication that
refers to individual students must be through a secure medium (UGAMail or eLC) or in person. Instructors are not allowed to respond to messages that refer to individual students or student progress in the course

through non-UGA accounts, phone calls, or other types of electronic media.
COURSE GRADES: There are 328.5 possible points for the semester, earned as outlined on the following page. There
is no final exam for the lab course as your work is evaluated weekly. Final grades are based on your accumulated points and will be awarded as follows:

Grade A AB+ B BC+ C CD F

(93%) (90-93%) (87-90%) (83-87%) (80-83%) (77-80%) (73-77%) (70-73%) (60-70%) (<60%)

Total Points 306 pts 296-306 pts 286-296 pts 273-286 pts 263-273 pts 253-263 pts 240-253 pts 230-240 pts 197-230 pts <197 pts

There will be no extra credit or bonus points given. Historically, students who attend their lab classes, prepare for lab on a weekly basis, and turn in all of their written work on time, earn good grades for their efforts.

GRADES: You should keep a record of all your lab grades and save your graded papers until the end of the
semester. ANY COMPLAINT ABOUT A GRADE MUST BE BROUGHT TO YOUR GLA's ATTENTION, IN WRITTEN FORM WITH A THOROUGH EXPLANATION AS TO WHY YOU DISAGREE WITH THE GRADE, WITHIN ONE WEEK OF THE GRADE BEING POSTED. Under no circumstance will a grade be changed after the last day of classes.
INCOMPLETES: The grade of Incomplete (I) is given to students who for reason of accident or illness who were
unable to complete a segment of the course. In no case will an Incomplete be given as a means of avoiding a failing grade.

ACADEMIC HONESTY: As a University of Georgia student, you have agreed to abide by the University's academic
honesty policy, "A Culture of Honesty," and the Student Honor Code. All academic work must meet the standards described in "A Culture of Honesty" found at: http://www.uga.edu/honesty/. Lack of knowledge of the academic honesty policy is not a reasonable explanation for a violation. Questions related to course assignments and the academic honesty policy should be directed to the instructor.

GROUP WORK: Much of your laboratory experiences in BIOL 1103L will be based upon work completed in small
groups. We encourage you to interact with your GLA and your classmates when completing your in-class work and your homework. However, you are expected to complete all written assignments by yourself (i.e. showing independent thought) unless otherwise directed by your GLA.

In the sciences, all co-authors on papers are held accountable for the accuracy and originality of the published work. Similarly, in lab assignments, when a student's name is on a group project, this implies that s/he takes responsibility for the accuracy and originality of the entire assignment (and also for any academic dishonesty that may have been involved).

Students often have difficulties determining how to demonstrate independent effort when they turn

in a group assignment (i.e. "We all did the same thing so shouldn't the work that we turn in be the same?"). Please carefully read Expectations about Group Work & Plagiarism, located on eLC, under the link "Plagiarism." You are responsible for being familiar with this document. If you ever have a question about whether or not you have crossed the fine line between group work and independent work, ask your GLA for assistance before you hand in an assignment.

Week Of Jan. 7
Jan. 14 Jan. 21
Jan. 28 Feb. 4 Feb. 11
Feb. 18
Feb. 25 Mar. 4
Mar. 11 Mar. 18 Mar. 25 Apr. 1 Apr. 8 Apr. 15

OUTLINE of Labs and SUMMARY of Points BIOL 1103L - Spring 2013

Lab Topic Lab 1: Lab Policies and Procedures Writing in BIOL 1103L Begin Scientific Investigations Intro to Graphing Finish Lab 1 Scientific Investigations Chimp worksheet/graphing Intro to Enzymes and Standard curves Lab 2: Carb Cutter I
Lab 3: Carb Cutter II: Student Experiments
Finish Lab 3  Also, Bacteria Part I Lab 6: Antibiotic Resistance
Lab 7: Finish Antibiotic Resistance
Lab 8: Case It! Investigator
Lab 8: Case it! Presentations
SPRING BREAK Lab 9: C. elegans I: The Creature from Beneath. Lab 10: C. elegans II, continue collecting data from C.elegans. Lab 11: C. elegans III, continue collecting data from C.elegans. Lab 4: Everybody Out of the Pool! Labs meet at Lake Herrick (Room 318) or Dudley Park/Oak St. (Room 320). Lab 5: Water Quality Presentations and Letter of Water Quality.

Points
24 34 15.5
33 46
39 20
24 23 10 5 55

Point Values
 In Class: Chimp Worksheet (CW, 14 pts)  Graphing Exercise due (G, 10 pts)
 Lab 2 Pre-Lab Questions due (P2, 29 pts)  In Class: Objectives 1 and 2 experimental
design (E2, 5 pts)
 Lab 3 Pre-Lab Questions due (P3, 10.5 pts)  In Class: Experimental design (E3, 5 pts)
 In Class: discussion on how to write a letter/article with scientific content.
 Carb Blocker draft due (D1, 10 pts)  Lab 6 Pre-Lab Questions due (P6, 20 pts)  In Class: Experimental design (E6, 3 pts)
 Antibiotic Pre-Lab Exercise due (P7, 20 pts)  In Class: Write-up of Antibiotic Experiment
with data (ANT, 6 pts)  Carb Cutter article - Peer Review (PR1, 20
pts)  In Class: Carb Cutter Peer Review Discussion
 Lab 8 Pre-Lab Questions due (P8, 9 pts)  Carb Blocker final article due (LR1, 30 pts)
 Case It! Presentations (PRES, 15 pts)  Peer Review Case It Presentations (PR-CASE,
5 pts)
NO LABS THIS WEEK!  Lab 9 Pre-Lab Questions due (P9, 19 pts)  In Class: Experimental design (E9, 5 pts)
 Lab 10 Pre lab Questions due (P10, 18 pts)  In Class: Experimental design (E10, 5 pts)
 C. elegans Summary Draft due (D2,10 pts) (will include everything but final results)
 Lab 4 Pre-Lab Questions (P4, 5 pts)
 C. elegans summary final draft (LR2, 30 pts)  Lab 5 Water Quality Presentations (WQP, 10
pts)  In Class: Letter on Water Quality - Group
work (LET, 10 pts)  Peer Review WQP (PR-WQP, 5 pts)

Classes end Monday, April 29th

