COURSE INFORMATION
PRINCIPLES OF BIOLOGY-I LABORATORY (BIOL 1107L)

The course syllabus is a general plan for the course; deviations may be necessary and will be announced to

the class by the instructor and/or posted on the lab’s web-site.

INSTRUCTORS:

Graduate Laboratory Assistant (GLA): GLA names, teaching assignments and email addresses will be

posted outside of Room 403 (The Biology Instruction Office, located on the 4th floor) and on the

eLearning Commons (eLC) web site associated with the lab. Students are strongly encouraged to take

advantage of the opportunity to discuss course material directly with their lab instructor during office

hours.

LAB PROGRAM COORDINATOR:

Dr. Kris Miller

Office: Room 402, Biological Sciences Building

Office Hours: By appointment - email or call

Phone: 542-1681

E-Mail: krmiller@.uga.edu

DATA COLLECTION SPECIALIST:

Ms. Yulonda Davis

Office: Room 403, Biological Sciences Building

Phone: 542-1684

E-Mail: ydavis1@uga.edu

Please see Yulonda with any concerns regarding enrollment, late add or withdrawal from the course,

removing an Incomplete (I), and any other administrative concern.

BIOSCIENCE LEARNING CENTER:

The Bioscience Learning Center (BLC) is located in room 406 of the Biological Sciences Building.

This facility houses computers (both MAC and PC) for use by students enrolled in courses at UGA. All

BLC computers are Internet connected. The BLC charges a small fee for printing and photocopying

and only accepts Bulldog Bucks for payment. BLC hours are from 8:30 AM - 7:00 PM, Monday

through Thursday; 8:30 AM - 5:00 PM, Friday. The BLC is closed on weekends.

MATERIALS FOR LAB CLASSES/DRESS CODE:

1. Lab Manual- A lab manual can be purchased at the on-campus and off campus bookstores in town. Bring your lab manual to lab each week.

2. Top-Perforated 50 Set Carbonless Notebook. This or it's equivelant may be purchased at the campus bookstore and possibly at bookstores off campus. You will need this to turn in assignments each week in lab.

3. Lab Coat -You will not be admitted under any circumstances without a lab coat.

4. Feet and legs must be completely covered. You must wear long pants or skirt. Shorts,skirts above the knee, and open-toed/heeled shoes are NOT allowed.

If you are dismissed from lab because of improper dress, it will count as an excused absence. You will have one week to complete a make-up assignment. If the work is not completed in that time, a minimum of 20 points deducted from your total points for lab. Three or more absences, whether excused or not, will result in receiving 0 points for lab for the semester (refer to "Attendance" section below for details)

5. Access to Mastering Biology for pre-lab homework assignments. You will also need access to this site for the lecture.

Access to Mastering Biology is free if you purchase as new copy of the textbook designated for this course. If you buy a used or other version of the textbook, you may need to purchase access to Mastering Biology. Access canbe purchase through the Mastering Biology website if needed.

WWW ACCESS TO COURSE INFORMATION, SYLLABUS AND POLICIES: The Division of Biological Sciences has created a lab course page with course information including a copy of the syllabus, assignment due dates, and policy information. The address for the laboratory homepage is https://www.elc.uga.edu/.

From time to time, announcements about the lab will be posted on the lab’s web page. You are responsible for checking the page for announcements on a regular basis.
ATTENDANCE: Attendance is required for this class. Missing even one class means that you have missed a significant portion of the course. DO NOT schedule any other appointments or activities during your scheduled lab sessions.
Missing labs with a valid excuse: A “valid” excuse is one that is written, verifiable, and covers the date and time of your scheduled lab class. Oversleeping and job conflicts do not constitute acceptable excuses. Missing a lab with a valid excuse allows you to make-up the lab provided that you contact your lab instructor within 48 hours of the absence. If you know in advance that you will miss a lab with a valid excuse, contact your GLA before the lab for possible reassignment to another lab period. Do not simply attend a different section. Doing so without prior approval by your GLA will be marked as an unexcused absence.
Make-up assignments are due within a time limit agreed to between you and your GLA and may include any or all of the following: evidence that you have consulted with your team members regarding missed work and data, completing the lab with a different section, submitting assignments associated with the missed lab, making up a lab assessment, and/or by completing an alternate assignment designated by the GLA or course instructor. Students who fail to complete the make-up work within the allocated time will not receive credit for the lab exercise. You are responsible for all material and data presented and gathered in lab.
Missing labs without a valid excuse: If you do not have a valid excuse for missing a lab, you will not be allowed to make up any work and will automatically receive a minimum of 20-point deduction from your total lab points (even if the lab is “worth” less than 20 points). If a lab is worth more than 20 points for that day, you will lose the total number of points for that day
Tardiness and leaving lab early without permission are not tolerated in lab. If you arrive to lab more than 15 minutes late or leave early without permission you will be marked as absent without a valid excuse and will receive a minimum deduction of 20 points from your total lab points for that day. If you arrive late, work due that day will be accepted and you will be able to stay and complete the lab for the day.
Assignments are due on the days indicated on the syllabus or by your instructor. Each day that an assignment is late, you will lose 20% of the assignment's total points.
Students who miss THREE or more labs at any point during the semester, even with valid excuses, will not be given credit (i.e., will receive 0 points) for the 1107 Lab. If a student has missed three or more labs due to extenuating circumstances and wishes to avoid a failing grade, s/he should request an Incomplete from her/his lecture instructor. Note: even if you make up the lab in another lab section with GLA approval, this will be recorded as an excused absence.
PREPARATION and PRE-LAB HOMEWORK: IT IS CRITICAL that you read the lab exercise in the lab manual before coming to lab. You will frequently be asked to carry out experiments of your own design. To do so effectively, you must come to lab prepared.
Pre-lab homework will be administered through Mastering Biology on several occasions during the semester. Mastering Biology homework assignments must be submitted by 6PM the night before the day of your lab or you will receive to a significant point deduction.
LABS:

Labs are scheduled to run for approximately 2 hours. You will need this time to adequately complete the lab exercise, analyze the results and clarify any points with your lab instructor. You are expected to participate and carefully observe all lab exercises, making certain you fully understand the material covered. Remember, your GLA is there to help you with the lab exercises and to evaluate your weekly performance and participation.
WRITTEN ASSIGNMENTS: You will be asked to prepare multiple written assignments of varying length during the semester. Your laboratory schedule and instructor will give you instructions as to the nature of each assignment. For assignments in which you are required to submit an electronic copy of your work, you must use a word processor and a copy submitted through the eLC (online submission does not apply to the library assignment). Microsoft Word, Open Office, or a compatible program is preferred. Your GLA may also request a hard copy of your report for grading purposes. If needed, Microsoft Excel, Open Office, and other spreadsheet software can be used to create graphs that can be inserted into your document. If you cite any articles in your assignment, you must either include a web-address (URL) for the article in your report (for on-line articles) or give photocopies of these articles to your GLA when the assignment is due. If you would like assistance in preparing your assignment, you may contact your GLA during their office hours. GLAs will not read or edit your lab report the day before it is due. Plan ahead and make the most of your time with your instructor.
BIOL 1107L and 2107L are Writing Intensive Lab Courses. They closely follow the guidelines established by The University of Georgia’s Writing Intensive Program (WIP). Our goal in following these guidelines is to help you become better writers in your academic field of science, as writing and thinking are parallel cognitive (learning) processes. Writing engages individuals in the information being studied and therefore results in better retention of this subject material.
GRADES: You should keep a record of all your lab grades and save your graded papers until the end of the term. ANY COMPLAINT ABOUT A GRADE MUST BE BROUGHT TO YOUR GLA’s ATTENTION, IN WRITTEN FORM WITH A THOROUGH EXPLANATION AS TO WHY YOU DISAGREE WITH THE GRADE, WITHIN ONE WEEK OF THE GRADE BEING POSTED. Under no circumstance will a grade be changed at the end of the semester.
The lab contributes a total of 300 points towards your 1107 course grade. However, it is likely that the total number of points that can be earned in the lab will not precisely equal 300. For this reason, the lab scores will be scaled to a range of 300 points at the end of the term. The examples below illustrate how this would work.
1. If you earned 225 of a possible 250 points in the lab, this is a 90% average. You will receive 90% of 300 (270 pts) towards your final 1107 course grade.
1.2. If you earned 315 of a possible 350 points in the lab, this is a 90% average. You will receive 90% of 300 (270 pts) towards your final 1107 course grade.
2. ACADEMIC HONESTY:
All academic work must meet the standards contained in “A Culture of Honesty.” Students are responsible for informing themselves about those standards before performing any academic work. This information is available on-line at http://www.uga.edu/ovpi/honesty/acadhon.htm. Any form of academic dishonesty will be reported to the Office of the Vice President for Academic Affairs . GROUP WORK: Many of your laboratory experiences in BIOL 1107L will be based upon work completed in small groups. We encourage you to interact with your GLA and your classmates when completing your in-class work and your homework. However, you are expected to complete all written assignments by yourself (i.e. showing independent thought) unless otherwise directed by your GLA. Students often have difficulties determining how to demonstrate independent effort when they work in groups to complete assignments (i.e. “we all did the same thing so shouldn’t the work that we turn in be the same?”). You are encouraged to carefully review the following page that discusses

Formatted: Bullets and Numbering

expectations about group work and plagiarism. If you ever have a question about whether or not you have crossed the fine line between group work and independent work, ask your GLA for assistance before you hand in an assignment.

Expectations about Group Work & Plagiarism
Just as scientists regularly share ideas, compare notes, and give each other constructive feedback, you are encouraged to interact with your GLA and your classmates when completing your in-class work and your homework. However, you are expected to complete all written assignments by yourself unless otherwise directed by your GLA. Using another person’s written work, referred to as “copying” or “plagiarism,” is defined on page 6 of the University of Georgia’s academic honesty policy, Culture of Honesty, as “Submission for academic advancement the words, ideas, opinions or theories of another that are not common knowledge, without appropriate attribution to that other person.” This is the case no matter how small the assignment. This policy can be found at http://www.uga.edu/honesty/ahpd/culture_honesty.htm; it provides you with a non-exhaustive list of types of plagiarism. You acknowledged and signed this document when you first enrolled at UGA and are therefore committed to this policy. You are expected to be familiar with it.
In regards to group work, the policy states that, “Submitting a group assignment, or allowing that assignment to be submitted, representing that the project is the work of all of the members of the group when less than all of the group members assisted substantially in its preparation” Is considered a violation of academic honesty (Page 7, Culture of Honesty, 2008).
In other words, it is okay if you confer with your GLA or other students how to set up an experiment or interpret results and then use what you have learned from the conversation as a basis for writing up an assignment. It is NOT okay to simply copy what someone else has written or tells you to write or to do less than your fair share of the work in a group assignment. Possible honor code violations will be reported to the Office of the Vice President for Instruction for an academic hearing.

If you ever have a question about whether or not you have crossed the fine line between group work and independent work, ask your GLA for assistance before you hand in an
assignment.

Schedule for BIOL 1107L/2107L - Fall 2011
Below is the schedule for the Biol-1107 lab for this semester. Changes to the schedule will be announced in lab and posted on eLC. Check eLC regularly for such changes.

Week Of:

Lab Topic

Assignments Due in Lab

Aug 15 LABS MEET THIS WEEK. Introduction, Safety, Lab #1

∑ In lab experimental design: (PT, 5 pts)

Aug 22 Lab 2: Practicing Science

∑ Lab quiz (LQ, 3pts)

Aug 29 Lab 3: Organic Molecules I:

∑ Organic molecules I Pre-lab (Mastering Biology): (M1P, 10 pts)
∑ In lab experimental design: (M1X, 5 pts)

Sep 5 Lab 4: Organic Molecules II:

∑ Organic molecules I Post-lab: (M1B, 20 pts)
∑ Organic molecules II Pre-lab (Mastering Biology): (M2P, 35 pts)
∑ In lab experimental design: (M2X, 5 pts)

Sep 12 Sep 19
Sep 26 Oct 3 Oct 10
Oct 17
Oct 24
Oct 31 Nov 7 Nov 14
Nov 21 Nov 28

Lab 5: Lab Practical

∑ Organic molecules lab practical: (MLP, 25 pts)

Lab 6: Enzymes:

∑ Organic molecules II Post-lab: (M2L, 20 pts)
∑ Enzymes Pre-lab (Mastering Biology): (EP, 20 pts)
∑ In lab experimental design: (EX, 5 pts)

Lab 7: The Library
∑ Orientation ∑ Assignment ∑ How To Avoid Plagiarism

∑ In-class library assignment: (LA, 2 pts)

Lab 8: Photosynthesis I: ∑ Pipetman training

∑ Enzymes Post-lab: (EB, 20 pts) ∑ Micropipette training video (on
eLC)

Lab 9: Photosynthesis II: ∑ Pipetman practical quiz

∑ Library Assignment: (LIB, 25 pts)
∑ In lab experimental results: (P2X, 5 pts)
∑ How to use a Pipetman practical: (PP, 10 pts)

Lab 10: DNA Restriction I:

∑ In lab experimental design: (DR1X, 5 pts)
∑ In lab graphing assignment: (DR1G, 5 pts)
∑ Agarose Gel video (on eLC)

Lab 11: DNA Restriction II:

∑ DNA Restriction II Pre-lab (Mastering Biology): (DR2P, 30 pts)
∑ In lab experimental design: (DR2X, 5 pts)
∑ Photosynthesis Post-Lab: (PC, 30 pts)

Lab 12: DNA Restriction III and PCR:

∑ PCR video (on eLC)

Lab 13: PCR and Case It

Lab 14: Case It Presentations

∑ Case It Presentation (CIP, 20 pts)
∑ Case It Peer Evaluation (CIPE, 5 pts)
∑ DNA Restriction III Post lab (DR2R, 30 pts)

THANKSGIVING BREAK: LAB CLASSES DO NOT MEET THIS WEEK

Lab 15: Lab Presentations

∑ Lab Presentation (LB, 30 pts) ∑ Peer Evaluation (PE, 5 pts)

