The course syllabus provides a general plan for the course; deviations may be necessary.
Please read this carefully.
Fall 2018
CBIO3000 Comparative Vertebrate Anatomy
Instructor: Adam B. Safer, Ph.D.
Office: 317
Office Hours: Tuesday and Thursday 2:00pm-3:00pm
Hours can also be scheduled by appointment. Please ask for help if you need it. I cannot help you if you do not ask.
Office Phone: 706-542-3322
E-mail: adam.safer@uga.edu This is the best way to contact me. Please do not email me using eLC; I will not respond.
Lectures: Tuesday and Thursday 12:30pm to 1:45pm in Biological Sciences 404B
Labs: Check your schedule for what time your lab meets in 322 Biological Sciences
Textbook: Vertebrates: Comparative Anatomy, Function, Evolution by Kenneth V. Kardong
Lab Manual: Comparative Vertebrate Anatomy: A Laboratory Dissection Guide by Kenneth V. Kardong and Edward J. Zalisko
Course Description: From the UGA course catalog: Comparative systemic vertebrate anatomy emphasizing structure and function.
Learning Outcomes:
(1) Recognize and differentiate among and between vertebrate taxa. (2) Understand the evolutionary relationships between and among different groups of
vertebrates. (3) Demonstrate understanding of how different groups of vertebrates are adapted to
solve similar biological problems by using different structures and processes. (4) Understand current scientific issues related to vertebrate zoology.
1

Evaluation: There will be a total of 6 lecture tests and 5 lab tests. THERE ARE NO MAKE-UP EXAMS. Test questions may consist of identification, essays, short answer, multiple choice, true/false, and matching.

Grading 6 lecture tests @ 125 points each...750 points (lowest dropped; highest counted twice) 5 lab test @ 50 points each............250 points Total........................................1000 points

Grading Scale:

Excellent

Above Average Average

Below Average

865 - 894 = B+ 765 - 794 = C+

595-694 = D*

925 - 1000 = A 825 - 864 = B 725 - 764 = C

895 - 924 = A- 795 - 824 = B- 695 - 724 = C-

Failing < 594

= F

General Laboratory Information Your laboratory section meets in room 322 Biological Sciences. You must attend the laboratory section for which you are registered. You may not switch laboratory sections, regardless of circumstance.
Use of lab presupposes your acceptance and agreement to abide by the following laboratory policies:
 Preserving of specimens often requires hazardous chemicals (phenol, formaldehyde, etc.). Students are advised to exercise appropriate caution and protection while using specimens. To this end, gloves and lab coats with long sleeves must be worn at all times in the lab.
 Safety. For safety reasons, shorts or short skirts, open toed shoes, flip-flops, and caps/ hats are NOT allowed. Long hair must be tied back or placed under a scrub cap. Students who violate this dress code will be asked to leave the lab until they are properly attired.
2

 Contact lens wearers. It is recommended that you not wear soft contact lenses in the laboratory. It is believed bysome that corneal damage can result from absorption of volatile fumes by such lenses. Hard lenses do not seem to be associated with such problems. Wearing eyeglasses rather than contact lenses in the lab is strongly encouraged.
 Pregnancy. It is recommended that female students who suspect or know that they are pregnant consult their physician for advice regarding the wearing of a vapor protective mask. There are no data currently available that demonstrate teratogenic effects in humans when exposed to vapor concentrations found in medical anatomy laboratories. Please contact the laboratory coordinator, your TA, or your instructor if you feel you must be excused from the laboratory.
 Absolutely no food or drinks are permitted in the labs.
Attendance: While there is no attendance requirement you are expected to attend all lecture sessions. To get the most from any course, you should attend all the scheduled classes and laboratory periods. The only way to really know what is going on in class is to come to class.
Exam Review and Grade Appeal: Once graded and posted to eLC, you will be able to review an exam during my office hours. However, you have two weeks following the posting of the grades, and review must be done in my office during office hours. This two-week window will be your only opportunity to review a particular exam. If you have not reviewed an exam during this time, you will not be able to go over it later to prepare for the final, nor will you be able to appeal or contest the grade. Please see the Grade Appeals section of this syllabus for details.
Changes to Final Letter Grade Final letter grades might be changed based upon factual errors. No other criteria are acceptable. Please note that if there is a factual error in a score you see recorded on eLearning Commons, you have one week after that score is posted to have that error corrected.
Disabilities Accommodations will be made for students with documented disabilities (meaning they are registered with the Disability Resource Center). Although requests for accommodations are handled electronically through the DRC, please feel free to meet with me personally to discuss your accommodations.
Student Classroom Conduct Appropriate classroom etiquette is essential for an effective learning experience. Students have a right to a productive and stimulating learning environment. A disruptive student will be told of his or her inappropriate
3

behavior; this discussion will include suggestions regarding appropriate behavior, as well as suggestions regarding a resolution of any laboratory or lecture conflicts. Continued inappropriate conduct will result in instructor-initiated academic withdrawal from the course. In addition, the student's behavior may be subject to disciplinary action under the University's Code of Student Conduct. Note that disruptive behavior may include the non-approved use of electronic devices, including cellular telephones. More information on the Code of Conduct can be found here: http://conduct.uga.edu/code_of_conduct/codeofconduct.pdf
Academic Misconduct Zero Tolerance Policy
The Office of the Vice President for Academic Affairs provides all students registered at this University with a booklet titled "A Culture of Honesty at the University of Georgia". This booklet specifies the policies to which you must adhere. All academic work must meet the standards contained in "A Culture of Honesty". Students are responsible for informing themselves about those standards before performing any academic work. If you have any questions regarding this policy, please contact your instructor.
Any student suspected of academic misconduct as defined by "A Culture of Honesty at the University of Georgia" will be reported to the Office of the VP for instruction resulting in a facilitated discussion between the instructor and student. A student who has been found responsible for academic misconduct will receive a "0" on the lecture or lab assignments, quizzes, or exams in question and, depending upon the severity of the academic misconduct, could be subject to additional sanctions (ranging from a further reduction in the overall course grade to expulsion).
Below are listed prohibited conducts and a list of possible sanctions.
Prohibited Conduct:
1) Plagiarism 2) Unauthorized Assistance 3) Lying/Tampering 4) Theft 5) Other (as defined by the policy)
4

List of Possible Sanctions: 1) "0" or the lowest possible grade on the academic work under the grading system for that course 2) Reduction of the course grade by a letter grade 3) Final course grade of "F" 4) Placement of a dishonesty transcript notation which states: "Academic Honesty Violation as Determined by the Office of the Vice President for Instruction," which must remain until the student is not enrolled as a student at the university and two years after the date upon which the Academic Honesty Panel entered its final decision. 5) Suspension 6) Dismissal 7) Expulsion
5

