ECOL 3505 Honors Ecology

Page 1

Ecology 3505 - General Ecology Honors Credits: 4.00 Physical and biological factors affecting distribution, abundance, and adaptations of organisms. Population, community, and ecosystem structure and function. Lab.

Instructor: Dr. Jeb Byers Office: 194B Ecology Phone: 583-0012 Office Hours: Wed. 3:50 (right after class) or by appointment. E-mail: jebyers@uga.edu
Dr. Alli Injaian Office: 134 Ecology E-mail: inja@uga.edu
Time/Place: Ecology Conference Room (Room 0012) W 3:00-3:50 PM

Your evaluation will be based on: 90% of your grade comes from the 3500 portion of this class.

The other 10% is composed of these elements: Ecology in the News Movie Critique Sim Bio Modules Participation/Engagement

100 points 100 points 150 points 150 points
Course total: 500 points

Your attendance, alertness, participation, and enthusiasm are expected.

COURSE OBJECTIVES 1. Increase knowledge of relevant topical issues in the field of ecology. 2. Increase skills in inference and critical thinking. 3. Practice engaging in scientific discussion to deepen knowledge of material. 4. Improve scientific communication abilities.

Late Policy: If you find that you have severe conflicts with turning an assignment in on time, contact Dr. Byers to discuss the situation before the assignment is due. Otherwise, assignments must be turned in on time.
Academic Integrity UGA students are bound by an academic honor code that details rights and responsibilities for students. You should be aware that this code provides serious sanctions for academic dishonesty

ECOL 3505 Honors Ecology

Page 2

(including, but not limited to, plagiarism and cheating). We expect that you will follow the honor code. If you have any questions about the honor code or about what constitutes plagiarism or cheating, please either check your UGa Student Handbook, also available on-line at http://www.uga.edu/honesty/ahs/ahs.htm, or speak with Dr. Byers.

Accommodations for Students with Disabilities If you have an identified disability and will need accommodations, you should first contact The Disability Resource Center (DRC) (https://drc.uga.edu/; 542-8719). They will discuss the UGA process and work with you to access supportive services. If you have a learning disability, the University will require you to provide supportive documentation and will develop an approved accommodation sheet for you. Accommodations cannot be provided until the accommodation sheet is established and we have met to discuss its applicability to this course. Accommodations cannot be provided retroactively. All conversations will be strictly confidential.

Coronavirus Information for Students
DawgCheck Please perform a quick symptom check each weekday on DawgCheck--on the UGA app or website-- whether you feel sick or not. It will help health providers monitor the health situation on campus: https://dawgcheck.uga.edu/
What do I do if I have symptoms? Students showing symptoms should self-isolate and schedule an appointment with the University Health Center by calling 706-542-1162 (Monday-Friday, 8 a.m.-5 p.m.). Please DO NOT walk-in. For emergencies and after-hours care, see https://www.uhs.uga.edu/info/emergencies.
What do I do if I am notified that I have been exposed? Students who learn they have been directly exposed to COVID-19 but are not showing symptoms should self-quarantine for 14 days consistent with Department of Public Health (DPH) and Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) guidelines. Please correspond with your instructor via email, with a cc: to Student Care & Outreach at sco@uga.edu, to coordinate continuing your coursework while self-quarantined. If you develop symptoms, you should contact the University Health Center to make an appointment to be tested. You should continue to monitor your symptoms daily on DawgCheck.
How do I get a test? Students who are demonstrating symptoms of COVID-19 should call the University Health Center. UHC is offering testing by appointment for students; appointments may be booked by calling 706-5421162.

What do I do if I test positive? Any student with a positive COVID-19 test is required to report the test in DawgCheck and should self-isolate immediately. Students should not attend classes in-person until the isolation period is completed. Once you report the positive test through DawgCheck, UGA Student Care and Outreach will follow up with you.

ECOL 3505 Honors Ecology Lecture Schedule (subject to changes that will be announced as necessary)

Page 3

Week 1: Aug 25 2: Sept 1 3: Sept 8 4: Sept 15 5: Sept 22 6: Sept 29 7: Oct 6 8: Oct 13 9: Oct 20 10: Oct 27 11: Nov 3 12: Nov 10

Topic Introduction; General Discussion Ecology in the News--Class Discussion Ecology in the News--Class Discussion Ecology in the News--Class Discussion No class Movie Analysis Movie Analysis Ecology in the News--Class Discussion Ecology in the News--Class Discussion No class SimBio--Isle Royale & Community Ecology SimBio--Ecosystem Ecology

13: Nov 17

Group Exercise; Wrap-Up

