PSYC 4150
Biological Foundations of Health Psychology
Spring Semester, 2021 3 Hours Credit (CRN 53664)

TIME:

Tuesday & Thursday, 2:20 p.m. - 3:35 p.m.

LOCATION: SLC 216

INSTRUCTOR:

Perry W. Buffington, Ph.D. DrBuff@uga.edu

OFFICE HOURS: By Appointment, Stuckey 215 OFFICE: TBA
REQUIRED TEXT Getz, G.E. (2014). Applied Biological Psychology. New York: Springer Publishing Company. ISBN: 978-0-8261-0922
COURSE DESCRIPTION This course involves the study of the structure and function of the nervous system, particularly the brain, and its impact on behavior. Everyday behaviors, such as language, emotions, and sleep will be explored from a neurobiological perspective. The course will focus primarily on understanding the neurophysiological underpinnings of many types of psychological/neurological/health disorders, such as schizophrenia, mood disorders, attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD), Alzheimer's disease, Parkinson's disease, and so on. This course will also demonstrate cognitive tasks utilized to quantify cognitive and emotional functioning.
OBJECTIVES Upon successful completion of the course, students should understand:
 Basic anatomy and physiology of the brain and nervous system  The biological basis and cognitive aspects of psychological/neurological disores  Biologically based treatments of psychological disorders  Ethical considerations of neurobiological research and treatment
UNIVERSITY HONOR CODE AND ACADEMIC HONESTY POLICY All academic work must meet the standards contained in "A Culture of Honesty." All students are responsible to inform themselves about those standards before performing any academic work. Visit the academic honesty web site at https://honesty.uga.edu/Academic-Honesty-Policy/ .

1

CLASS SCHEDULE: The following schedule is tentative. More time may be taken in some sections and less in others. Exam and assignment dates may change.

WEEK

TOPIC(S)

1 History & Methods
2 Nervous System and Brain Structure
3 Major Neurobiological Systems
4 Major Neurobiological Systems cont'd
5 Childhood Disorders
6 Schizophrenia
7 Mood Disorders
8 Anxiety Disorders

CHAPTERS 1 & 2

QUIZZES & ASSIGNMENTS

3

4

5

6

Exam 1

7

8

9

NOTES

9 Eating Disorders

10

Exam 2

10 Sleep Disorders 11 Substance Disorders 12 Medical Disorders 13 Traumatic Brain Injury 14 Personality Disorders 15 Summary Th. 5/6 FINAL EXAM: 3:30 -
6:30 PM

11

12

13

14

Exam 3

2

GRADING

3 Exams

75 Points

Final

25 Points

Total Points 100 Points

A

90-100

B

80-89

C

70-79

D

60-69

F

59 & Below

EVALUATIONS Exams: There will be three exams and one final, all equally-weighted. These exams will consist of multiple-choice, short answer, fill in the blank, short essay, and/or matching. These will test your knowledge of material covered in the text, lectures, and required supplemental readings. There is a large amount of information in each of these sections; therefore, it is imperative that you distribute your studying.

MAKE-UP EXAM POLICY Make-up exams will not be given unless appropriate written documentation of an emergent situation (e.g., a doctor's note) can be provided within seven (7) days of the missed exam. I reserve the right to use a different form of assessment in these situations (e.g., essay or oral examination).

CLASS MATERIALS Supplemental lecture materials will be provided in class only. If you must miss a class, please arrange for a classmate to pick up copies for you. Relying on these materials as your sole form of note taking is extremely risky and is discouraged. These materials are not designed to be a study guide; they may or may not contain material that is not discussed. They are provided to facilitate the objectives for this class. In other words, it is vital you maintain your own notes.

CLASS ATTENDANCE Given the cumulative nature of this course, you should not exceed two (2) unexcused absences. Please inform the instructor of your reasons for an absence only if you have a legitimate excuse. Excessive absences are grounds for dismissal from the class and issuance of a "W."

CLASS ANNOUNCEMENTS Announcements concerning the class and changes in the class schedule will be made in class and/or via e-mail. Therefore, if you attend class and check your University e-mail account frequently, you will stay current.

DISABILITY ACCOMMODATIONS If you have a disability and require classroom accommodations, please see me after class or make an appointment during office hours. If you plan to request accommodations for a disability, please register with the Disability Resource Center through the Office of Student Affairs, 105 Flynt Building, 770-412-4096 (office), 770-712-2594 (UGA mobile), or ccm16@uga.edu .

3

