Course Syllabus - Description and Policies: Microbiology 4500/6500 Bacterial Symbioses This is a general course plan; deviations announced in class may be necessary.
Mon, Wed, Fri: Room 326 Biological Sciences 11:15-12:05
Instructor: Eric Stabb, 258-B Biological Sciences (inside main lab room 258), 542-2414, estabb@uga.edu
Office hours: By appointment (setup by email is usually best). Weekly drop-in hours may be set by popular demand.
Topic and Objectives: MIBO4500 covers the microbiomes of plants and animals, focusing on interactions between
bacteria and the hosts they colonize. Both pathogenic bacteria and those that benefit their hosts are covered and compared, with the emphasis on beneficial microbes. In addition to discussing what is known about these interactions, the course will examine how scientists study these associations. Students can expect to learn about current models of bacteria-host interactions as well as the techniques and approaches used by scientists in this field. Monday and Friday classes will be primarily lecture format. Wednesday class periods usually will be devoted to group discussions of specific journal articles. Students will be given questions that they should try to answer as they read these papers, which helps to bring focus and to break complex studies into understandable parts.
Outline/Schedule: A separate handout on eLC will contain the proposed schedule. Deviations announced to the class may be necessary.
Course Materials: There is no textbook for this course. I suggest you keep a 3 ring binder (~2") for class
handouts, papers, and your notes. Materials will be provided primarily through eLC, including; handouts to accompany most lectures, specific papers from the primary literature, some review papers, exercises, etc. With few exceptions, these materials will be provided on eLC. Students are responsible for printing their own copies, and should do so in advance of needing them. Having a problem downloading and printing a paper the night before a discussion is usually not a good reason to be unprepared for class. You should also be prepared to take notes on blank paper (or laptop) at any time.
Grading (4500 students): Students will be graded on an A to F scale, using the plus/minus system. Grades will be
determined based on the number of points earned out of 500 possible. Three in-class exams and a final exam will each count for 100 points. The remaining 100 points will be earned through inclass participation, quizzes, and homework. Quizzes may not be announced in advance.
So that more naturally outspoken students do not have an advantage over shy students, the instructor may call on any student at any time during class. When papers are discussed, the questions handed out with them may be considered homework and may or may not be collected and checked after class. (More explanation of non-exam points is provided in a separate handout)
Requirements for 6500: Students taking the graduate level course (6500) will also be required to write a term page
paper, worth 100 points, on a relevant topic of their choosing, giving them a total of 600 points for the semester. Details on this project will be given separately. Graduate students may also be considered separately for the determination of participation grades.

Grading scale (4500 students): Based on popular demand (from student evaluations), final grades will not be curved for 4500
students, but will follow a set scale:

450-500 pts 425-449 pts 400-424 pts 375-399 pts 350-374 pts

A (cutoff 90%) A- (cutoff 85%) B+ (cutoff 80%) B (cutoff 75%) B- (cutoff 70%)

335-349 pts 315-334 pts 300-314 pts 275-299 pts

C+ (cutoff 67%) C (cutoff 63%) C- (cutoff 60%) D (cutoff 55%)

Attendance policy: **I reserve the right to execute an "instructor initiated withdrawal" for students who do not attend**
Attendance is critical to doing well in this class. 100 pts is based on participation, quizzes and homework, and you must come to class to receive full credit for these. Thus, you cannot receive an A simply by coming to exams. Furthermore, class handouts only serve as a template for note taking, handouts do not replace lecture, and there is no textbook. Students who regularly skip this class typically do not do well.
Also, please be on time for lecture. It is very distracting to both the students and the instructor to have students coming in late.
Make-up exam policy: Accommodations for make-up (or early) examinations will be made in the case of planned
and excused absences. The mechanism for make-up examinations (e.g. whether the same or different testing is used) will be determined on a case-by-case basis.
Whether or not make-up exams will be made available for unplanned absences, and how missing exam grades would figure into the final grade, will be decided on a case-by-case basis. If you miss an exam it is imperative that you follow these guidelines: (1) Do not talk to anyone in the class about the exam. (2) Contact me as soon as possible. (3) Be prepared to take a make-up exam as soon as possible, which may include evening or weekend times.
Academic Honesty: As a University of Georgia student, you have agreed to abide by the University's academic honesty policy, "A Culture of Honesty", and the Student Honor Code. All academic work must meet the standards described in "A Culture of Honesty" found at: https://ovpi.uga.edu/academic-honesty

Lack of knowledge of the academic honesty policy is not a reasonable explanation for a violation. Questions related to the course assignments and the academic honesty policy should be directed to the instructor. A website for more detailed information about academic honesty can be found at the link above.

