Introductory Virology POPH/MIBO/IDIS 4650/6650 Fall Semester 2021, Tuesday and Thursday 11-12:15
Room Vet Med H203 Course Coordinators: García & Brindley
COURSE OBJECTIVES OR EXPECTED LEARNING OUTCOMES The objective of this course is to have students understand the basic principles of virology as an integrative discipline. Students will learn fundamental concepts of the viral replication cycle, as well as learn about pioneering advances in the field of virology, how to control viral infections, and the dynamic evolution of viruses.
REVIEW PAPER AND RESEARCH PROPOSAL Undergraduate students will be required to write a review paper on a virology concept discussed in class for a particular viral family or specific virus. Graduate students will be required to write a Research proposal addressing a virology question. We will provide Guidelines with specifics on Papers and Proposal formats. Review papers and proposals are due December 7.
ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS FOR COURSE Throughout the semester there will be 4 class periods in which we will discuss primary literature related to the topics we are covering. Groups of graduate students (4 to 5) will be responsible for leading the discussion of an assigned paper in a journal club format. Graduate student groups will be responsible to meet and organize the presentation, but all students need to attend and participate in the discussion. Each exam will include questions on the paper discussed, special attention will be given to the methods, so it is important for both undergraduate and graduate students to participate in the discussions of this primary literature.
eLC ACCESS All course materials, quizzes, and tests will be through eLC. Please bring some electronic device that can access eLC for quizzes and tests. (We will have a few copies of paper tests if computers go down, but only for emergencies). In addition most assignments will be turned in through eLC.

GRADING SYSTEM Grade Scale: A 100-93, A- 92-90, B+ 89-87, B 86-83, B- 82-80, C+ 79-77, C 76-73, C- 72-70, D+ 69-67, D 66-63, D- 62-60, F <60. Note: grades ending in >0.5 round up to the next whole number, e.g. 92.6 rounds to 93, but 92.5 counts as 92.

Undergraduates

4 exams = 75% Review PAPER = 15% *Class participation, quizzes, homework and attendance = 10%

Graduates

4 exams = 65% Research PROPOSAL = 15% Journal Club Presentation= 10% *Class participation, quizzes, homework and attendance= 10%

If you miss an exam (unexcused), it will be scored as a zero. Make-up exams for excused absences must

be arranged with the professor giving the exam (see syllabus) well in advance for University-approved absences or the day of return from an illness (Doctor's excuse is required for full period of absence). Exams may have a mix of short answer, short discussion, multiple choice, and fill-in the blanks. You must use a pen to answer the exams or you cannot request a re-grade. There will be no individual extra credit to improve grades. * Notice that there is material and exercises covered during lecture that is necessary to fully understand and participation in class is highly encouraged. Therefore, it is essential that you attend lectures, turn-in homework and participate in class this would be 10% of your grade.
FLIP THE CLASS There will be four class periods where the lecture format will be flip. On these days, you will need to read assigned chapter, read the eLC lecture and watch Dr. Racaniello lecture on You Tube or his blog before attending class. In order to have high participation, a short five questions quiz will be given in the first few minutes of the flip the class periods. These quizzes are designed to determine if you watched the lecture and are not designed to be difficult or tricky. In addition, there are several Virus Watch videos assigned when videos are relevant to the lecture topic. These are short, less than 10 min, videos that will introduce a particular virology topic. Please watch them before class. Note* test questions may relate to the videos.
READING
Reading assignments from required text-book FLINT PRINCIPLES OF VIROLOGY 4th or 5th edition. Any assigned research article will be posted on the e-Learning Commons site for the course. For additional assigned material visit the Virology blogs by Vincent Racaniello (WWW.virology.ws) (WWW.twiv.tv). Power-point slides for each lecture will be posted to the e-Learning Commons (http://elc.uga.edu/).
NOTES ON HOW TO BE SUCCESSFUL STUDENTS Virology is a complicated topic, especially because there are so many different types of viruses that replicate in different ways. Viruses "live" inside cells, so having a good understanding of basic cell biology will increase your success rate in the class. In previous years, the students that received A's in the class have noted that they read the chapters before lecture and frequently would watch Dr. Racaniello's lecture's for additional information or listen to TWIV (This week in Virology). Reading, listening, and watching the material in a variety of ways from different sources enabled them to understand the material and perform well on the tests.
Teaching assistant: Jiachen Huang jiachenh@uga.edu will be managing any questions students have regarding lecture schedules, absences, were to find grades, exams dates..............
There are no designated office hours for the Instructors; you may set up appointments with the Faculty by e-mail (Please do not just drop by our offices!) Dr. Maricarmen García mcgarcia@uga.edu & Dr. Melinda Brindley mbrindle@uga.edu
All academic work must meet the standards contained in "A Culture of Honesty." Students are responsible for informing themselves about those standards before performing any academic work. http://www.uga.edu/ovpi/academic_honesty/academic_honesty.htm
The course syllabus is a general plan for the course; deviations announced to the class by the instructor may be necessary.

Dates
8/19
8/24 8/26 8/31 9/2 9/7 9/9
9/14 9/16 9/21
9/23
9/28
9/30 10/5 10/7
10/12 10/14
10/19 10/21 10/26 10/28 11/2 11/4 11/9 11/11 11/16 11/18
11/23 11/30 12/2 12/7 12/9

Lectures and Exams
What is a virus? Virus infectious Cycle Viral Genomes Viral Structures Viral Attachment and Entry Paper Discussion Vaccines
Exam I RNA directed RNA synthesis Viral DNA Replication, Synthesis of RNA from DNA and RNA processing Protein Translation and Assembly
Viral Transmission Antivirals Paper Discussion
Viral gene Therapy
Exam II Intrinsic and Innate Responses Adaptive Responses Influenza Viral Evolution Emerging viruses Paper Discussion Exam III Acute Infections Persistence infections Herpesviruses Reverse transcriptase and Lentiviruses Human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) Viral Oncogenesis Paper Discussion Discuss Homework Exam IV

Material to prepare before class Virus Watch: Are viruses alive? Virus Watch: Counting Viruses Watch online lecture Virus Watch Building Zika Read assigned Paper
Virus Watch: How mosquitoes spread viruses Watch online lecture Read assigned Paper
Turn-in Topic Review or Proposal
Covid-19 (Coronavirus) Read assigned paper
Read assigned paper Turn In review or proposal 12:00 to 3:00

Assignments
Homework Flip the class Quiz Flip the class Quiz Paper summary Turn in - Virus trading cards genome, structure, entry
Flip the class Quiz Paper summary Turn in - Virus trading cards transcription, genome replication, budding
Paper summary
Paper summary

Text Book ** Instructor

Chapter 1 (volume 1) Chp 2 (v1) Chp 3 (v1) Chp 4 (v1) Chp 5 (v1)
Chp 7 (v2)

Rajao
Rajao Rajao Brindley Brindley Brindley Brindley

Chp 6 (v1) Chps 7 & 9 (v1) Chps 11-13 (v1)
Chp 8 (v2)
Chp 9 (v2)

Brindley García
Brindley Brindley Brindley Brindley

Chps 3 (v2)

Brindley Tompkins

Chp 4 (v2)
Chp 10 (v2) Invite Lecture
Chp 5 (v2) Chp 5 (v2)
Chp 10 (v1) & Chp 12 (V2) Chp 12 (V2) Chp 6 (v2)

Tompkins Rajao Brindley Hogan Rajao Brindley Brindley García García García
Norris García García García Garcia

** Chapters from Principle of Virology 5th edition.

