BIOL1103: Concepts in Biology
Instructor Contact

OFFICE HOURS

DR. JILL BEYETTE
jill.beyette@uga.edu 4506 Miller Plant Sciences Office phone 706-542-5137

(on Zoom)
Tuesday 11am to noon
Wednesday 9-10 am
Thursday 11am to noon
If these times don't work for you, then email me to set up a different appointment time.

Course Description
In Biol 1103, we will address issues regarding scientific claims about health, the environment, and society to help you develop skills important for becoming a critical consumer of science information in the media. This course fulfills UGA's Gen Ed Core Curriculum science requirement. Not open to students with credit in BTNY 1210-1210L or BIOL 1107-1107L or PBIO 1210-1210L
Learning Objectives
By the end of the course, you will be able to:
Apply principles of biology to real world situations like deciding to get genetic testing or a vaccination. Identify and evaluate valid sources of scientific information. Analyze and apply scientific information to make everyday decisions. Explain how scientists test claims and compose scientific arguments. Communicate scientific ideas and build arguments in writing.
Non-Traditional Course Format

In this course, most of the content will be taught online in an asynchronous environment, meaning that you can work on the material in a module at any time. There are due dates for each module (see Schedule-at-a-Glance). In addition, synchronous classes will be held, where each student will attend one class session per week. For the first two weeks (through August 28th, synchronous classes will be held on Zoom during regular class time. After that, some synchronous classes may be held face-to-face in room 285 of the Science Learning Center during regular class time. During Zoom or Face-to-Face classes, students will listen to short powerpoint lectures, and then spend the rest of the time working in groups on an assignment, which will be due directly after class. Some in-class sessions will be specifically for review of the material. If a student is ill or cannot attend the class, they will be able to download the assignment from the checklist, complete it on their own, and submit it for full credit.
Course Textbook
We are using a free-of-charge open-access textbook, Concepts in Biology, published by Openstax. Links will be provided to individual reading assignments within Concepts in Biology. You can download a complete PDF version of the textbook, or download an app that will allow you to use an e-reader. All readings, animations, and other videos to help you master content will be available in the content modules as clickable links.
Emailing Course Instructor
When you email me, please use this email address: jill.beyette@uga.edu I will make every effort to respond within 24 hours. Also, in your emails please always include:
your name your group number your registered class section (MWF 10:10 am, MWF 1:25 pm, or T-Th 9:30 am).
Technical skills
To be successful in this course, you will need the following technical skills:
Use of eLC mail, discussions, and assignment dropbox. Use of Zoom for meetings and online office hours (available through eLC). Use of eLC for quizzes and exams Open, access, and save files in commonly used word processing program formats such as Microsoft Word.
Available Help (Class-Related and Technical Issues)
Please let me know if you need individual help. I will stay logged onto Zoom after every synchronous Zoom class to answer questions. Also, you can visit my Zoom Virtual Office Hours. And you can always email me with questions. Additionally, there will be a discussion forum in this online course for you to post any issues or concerns.
For TECHNICAL PROBLEMS with eLC or other issues, contact: UGA's Enterprise Information Technology Services (EITS) Help Desk at 706-542-3106, or email at helpdesk@uga.edu.
Course Outline
The Course at a Glance Table is a general plan for the course with due dates and a summary of assignments; deviations announced to the class by the instructor may be necessary. Each of the 7 content modules is available under the Content Link and consists of:
Readings, animations, and videos to help you learn the relevant biological concepts/content for each topic; Test Yourself quizzes (not for credit) to test your own understanding Assessment quizzes (10% of course grade) to formally assess your understanding and ability to apply the content. These are open-note. Discussion postings (15% of course grade) to allow you to explore your thinking, reasoning, and opinions in a social context. In-Class Assignments (15% of course grade) to allow you to demonstrate your mastery of skills and content introduced in the Module (including exploratory writing, concept mapping, problemsolving, and so forth). Each of these small summative assignments are designed to let you get a taste of what completing a final project in this topic would entail. End-of-Module Test (35% of course grade) to test your overall understanding of the unit content. These seven tests will each consist of 15 multiple-choice questions that are not memorizationbased. Instead they are application-oriented questions where you have to understand the content and apply your knowledge to solve the problem. You can use your book and notes, but the test is timed, so thorough studying ahead of time will be necessary.
Finally, there is one Final Project (25% of course grade). There are 7 possible final project topics, and the choices are aligned with the 7 modules of the course. Early in the semester, you will choose a partner within your group, and together you will select one of the content topics that interests you and explore it in depth for your final project. The final project is designed to allow you to practice using the content and skills we have learned in the module to address real-world issues. You will turn in a rough draft of your project for instructor feedback (due one week after the module ends). Also, you will submit your rough draft to the Discussion board so that you can get comments from your peers. Your group members will be asked to help review these postings using a peer grading rubric. I will take the weekend to read and comment on your draft, and then you will have another week to make revisions and submit your final project to the Discussion board and to Dropbox.
Attendance Policy/Expectations of Participation
Student participation is an expected and critical component of success in this course. You are expected to log in at least 3 times a week, and should expect to spend about 10 hours a week on this course. Approximate/suggested times for completion of each activity are posted on the Module-at-a-Glance page posted as the first page in each module. Each week you will be expected to complete readings, assessment quizzes, and respond to discussion posts by the deadline indicated so that your peers can respond to your comments in a timely manner.
Synchronous Zoom Classes
In addition, you will attend one synchronous zoom class session per week. During this session, there will be a short bit of powerpoint instruction, followed by breakout discussions with your student group. During these breakout sessions, you will work on an in-class assignment on a Google Doc with your group. Then you will submit this assignment by uploading it to an assignment dropbox at the end of the class time. It will be graded for points.
The Synchronous Zoom class will meet during your regularly-scheduled class time. In order to know which day you should attend, first you'll need to check your group number. Go to the Tools pulldown on the menu bar at the top of our eLC homepage. Click on Groups to see your group number.
Once you know which group you're in, check the Class Meeting Schedule to see which day of the week you'll be required to attend the Synchronous Zoom Class. You'll need to log onto Zoom at your scheduled class time on the day that your group is scheduled to meet.
Group Assignments
Each module includes in- and out-of-class assignments, some completed solo and others with a group. I will be assigning you to a small group of 5 students who you will work with to complete in-class assignments, and your Final Project. Whenever the class meets by Zoom, if there is a breakout session, you will meet with your group of 5 students. Your group will be part of a larger group of 20 students with whom you will post your Discussion Posts. Your small group of 5 students, and your large group of 20 students, are your class community. Get to know each other, and help each other out! Your whole group may want to meet with me during virtual office hours--this would be a really useful question-and-answer format.

how to benefit from teamwork
You will be working with a group of 4 people all semester during class assignments and group tests. Why? Because the act of exchanging reasoning and explaining your own understanding helps you learn better and makes the class more fun.
To work effectively, however, every member of your group needs to contribute. If a member misses a test or fails to contribute on an assignment, that person needs to explain the reason. The other group members may decide that member should not receive shared group points. You will get the opportunity to (anonymously) give feedback about all the other members of the group using an online peer evaluation system twice during the semester.

bickering

cooperating

Ineffective groups don't see eye to eye: one member dominates while another member coasts on other's work. It is critical that every member of the group comes prepared and works equally. If members fail to attend meetings, don't complete their portion of the group task, or submit unacceptable work you have the right to "fire" that member.
Firing involves a two step process: (1) Email warning, negotiation (2) Removal from the group if not rectified. The member now has to complete all assignments individually unless adopted by a new group.
Let problematic group members know their faults on the first online evaluation.

In these groups, everyone works together. They listen to eachother and don't override everyone else to get their way. However, interactions are done to be efficient, with each member separately completing their share of the work.
These groups assign members different tasks but rarely give constructive feedback. Instead they just merge and submit the final assignment without trying to improve it first. It feels to these group members that the others just don't really care.

collaborating
These group members actively engage in discussion, negotiation, and consensus building. During group work in class they discuss the different answers and the reasoning for their answer, and they work to make sure that everyone in the group contributes.
One example might be a group that studies for a test by assigning each member a different section of material for that test, learning that material really, really well, and taking turns teaching their section to the rest of the group during a study session.

Discussion Posts
A few times during each module, you will respond to a topic on a discussion post. Your contribution to the discussion post will be required and graded. Sometimes there will be an associated rubric to use for the discussion post. When posting and communicating with your class colleagues, it's a good idea to practice "Netiquette"--a way of defining professionalism through network communication. Students who violate proper Netiquette will be first given a warning, and if it occurs twice, will be administratively dropped by the instructor from the course.
Here are some example Guidelines:
Do not dominate any discussion. Do not use offensive language. Never make fun of someone's ability to read or write. Use simple English. Use correct spelling and grammar. Share tips with other students. Keep an "open-mind" and be willing to carefully consider every opinion. Be aware of the The University of Georgia's Academic Honesty policy. Think before you push the "Send" button. Do not hesitate to ask for feedback. When in doubt, always check with your instructor for clarification
(Sample policy used with permission from: Mintu-Wimsatt, Alma, Kernek, Courtney, and Lozada, Hector R. 2010. "Netiquette: Make it Part of Your Syllabus" MERLOT Journal of Online Learning and Teaching, 6, No.1.)
Tests and Quizzes

Unit 2 Unit 3

Unit Test Sep 4 Date

Sep 18

Unit 4 Unit 5 Unit 6 Oct 2 Oct 16 Oct 29

Unit 7 Unit 8 Nov 13 Dec 4

All assessment quizzes and tests are open-book/open note. You can use the course readings and videos to answer the questions. However, you must answer them yourselves without using the "phone a friend" option. In addition, the use of Chegg or other resources where someone else does the work (whether for a test or a project) is considered unauthorized assistance, is not allowed, and would be considered a violation of The University of Georgia's Academic Honesty policy to use unauthorized assistance or to plagiarize work.
An important note on open-book tests and quizzes: These are time-limited. Once you begin a test or quiz, you only have a limited amount of time to complete it. This means that you will have to study thoroughly in advance in order to do well on it, because there won't be enough time to review material while you're taking the test or quiz.
The course graders and I will begin grading assignments and discussion posts as soon as the due date for them has expired. My goal is to have all assignments for a Module posted within 3 days of their due dates.

Missed Quiz and Discussion Posts
The course at a glance table contains the due dates for each module. Missed Unit test, assessment quiz, in-class assignments and discussion post assignments will not be available for make-up after the due dates indicated. However, sometimes life happens, and you might miss a quiz or assignment. To account for this, we will drop some scores--see below. Note: Extra credit assignments are not given in this course. The lowest scores in the following categories will be dropped:
the lowest 2 assessment quizzes. If you forget to take a quiz, it can count as one of those dropped quizzes. the lowest End-of-Module Test score. one of your discussion posts, if you forget to complete one of those as well.

Late work submissions: final projects only
Final projects will be accepted with a 10% deduction of total points for each day it is late. This is the only assignment that is accepted late in this course.

Grade scale to determine final course grades

Letter Grade Point Value

A

92.5% and above

A-

89.5-92.49%

B+

87.5-89.49%

B

82.5-87.49%

B-

79.5-82.49%

C+

77.5-79.49%

C

72.5-77.49%

C-

69.5-72.49%

D

59.5-69.49%

F

Below 59.5%

UGA Student Honor Code
The UGA student honor code is as follows: "I will be academically honest in all of my academic work and will not tolerate academic dishonesty of others." A Culture of Honesty, the University's policy and procedures for handling cases of suspected dishonesty, can be found at www.uga.edu/ovpi. As a University of Georgia student, you have agreed to abide by the University's Academic Honesty policy, "A Culture of Honesty," and the Student Honor Code. All academic work must meet the standards described in A Culture of Honesty. Lack of knowledge of the Academic Honesty policy is not a reasonable explanation for a violation. Questions related to course assignments and the academic honesty policy should be directed to the instructor.

Mental Health and Wellness Resources
If you or someone you know needs assistance, you are encouraged to contact Student Care and Outreach in the Division of Student Affairs at 706-542-7774 or visit https://sco.uga.edu. They will help you navigate any difficult circumstances you may be facing by connecting you with the appropriate resources or services. UGA has several resources for a student seeking mental health services (https://www.uhs.uga.edu/bewelluga/bewelluga) or crisis support (https://www.uhs.uga.edu/info/emergencies). If you need help managing stress anxiety, relationships, etc., please visit BeWellUGA (https://www.uhs.uga.edu/bewelluga/bewelluga) for a list of FREE workshops, classes, mentoring, and health coaching led by licensed clinicians and health educators in the University Health Center. Additional resources can be accessed through the UGA App.
Disability Statement
UGA is committed to the success of all learners, and we strive to create an inclusive and accessible online environment. In collaboration with the Disability Resource Center (http://drc.uga.edu/), we work with students who have documented disabilities to access reasonable accommodations and academic supports.
For more information or to speak with a Disability coordinator, please call the Disability Resource Center at (706) 542-8719, TTY only phone (706) 542-8778.

Copyright
This course may contain copyright protected materials such as audio or video clips, images, text materials, etc. These items are being used with regard to the Fair Use doctrine in order to enhance the learning environment. Please do not copy, duplicate, download or distribute these items. The use of these materials is strictly reserved for this online classroom environment and your use only. All copyright materials are credited to the copyright holder.

Third-Party Software and FERPA
During this course you might have the opportunity to use public online services and/or software applications sometimes called third-party software such as a tool, blog, or wiki. While some of these are required assignments, you need not make any personally identifying information on a public site. Do not post or provide any private information about yourself or your classmates. Where appropriate you may use a pseudonym or nickname. Some written assignments posted publicly may require personal reflection/comments, but the assignments will not require you to disclose any personally identifiable/sensitive information. If you have any concerns about this, please contact your instructor.
BIOL1103E: Concepts in Biology

