BIOL 1104: ORGANISMAL BIOLOGY Spring 2017
285 Science Learning Center, T/Th 9:30 - 10:45 am

Welcome to BIOL 1104! We are excited to work with you this semester. BIOL 1104 is one of our favorite classes to teach because the students come from many different areas of expertise and the topics we discuss are highly relevant to modern life. This class is NOT a traditional science course in which you listen quietly to lectures, feverishly write notes, and then memorize your notes for the exams. That sort of class does a great job preparing you to regurgitate facts on exams, but after college you will rarely be asked to take exams. Additionally, most facts are readily available on the Internet. Instead of memorizing facts, the main objective of this class is to prepare you to think skeptically about scientific information and its relevance to your life. Another goal of this class is to help you develop skills that will be useful on the job market and in life, including thinking critically, working collaboratively in groups, and finding and evaluating scientific information on your own. Lastly, an important objective of this course is to help you to become more comfortable and confident in your ability to understand and make decisions about biology in your own life. The course syllabus is a general plan for the course. We will announce deviations to the class if necessary.

THE BASICS
Instructors
Dr. Tessa Andrews (tandrews@uga.edu) & Dr. Anna Jo Auerbach (annajo@uga.edu) Office (for both): C210 Davison Life Sciences Building. **If you have trouble finding the room, call 706-­- 542-­-3340. We will respond to emails within 24-­-48 hours Monday through Friday. If you email during the weekend, you can expect a response on Monday morning.

Office hours

Monday: 3:45-­4:45 pm

Tuesday: 3-­4 pm

By appointment

Office hours are a great way to interact with the instructors. We strongly encourage ALL students to

come to office hours at least once, preferably early in the semester.

Getting your questions answered
There are multiple ways to find an answer to your questions about BIOL 1104. If you have a question, please follow these steps, in order: 1. Read this syllabus carefully. It answers many common questions. 2. Check the "News" on eLC. This is where we will post the most up-­-to-­-date announcements. It will be
the first thing you see when you open the eLC page for this course. 3. Post your question on a discussion board. There is a discussion board called "Questions about BIOL
1104" for general questions about the course and a discussion board for questions about a specific unit. You may find that your question has already been answered on the discussion board or that you are able to answer other students' questions. 4. If your question concerns your grade or something else personal, please email us at our UGA email addresses (tandrews@uga.edu; annajo@uga.edu ). We DO NOT check email in eLC.

Required course tools
eLC: This course uses eLC extensively. Get help at: http://www.ctl.uga.edu/elc/student

1

Pre-­-class reading/videos/podcasts: There will be assigned pre-­-class preparation prior to each class, including reading, videos, and podcasts (see Unit Calendars in eLC. All of these materials will be posted on eLC. Some readings will come from a FREE textbook that is posted as a PDF on eLC. There are no books you need to purchase for this class.

Top Hat: We will be using the Top Hat (www.tophat.com) classroom response system in class. You will be able to submit answers to in-­-class questions using Apple or Android smartphones or by texting in your answers from any type of phones. STARTING THURSDAY January 12, I WILL EXPECT EVERYONE TO HAVE AN ACTIVE TO TOP HAT ACCOUNT. You will use your cell phone to respond to in-­-class questions every class period. You need to have it and be able to use it in every class period. No excuses accepted. · An email invitation will be sent to you by email, but if don't receive this email, you can register by
simply visiting our course website: https://app.tophat.com/e/679571 · Note: Our Course Join Code is: 679571 · Top Hat will require a paid subscription, and a full breakdown of all subscription options available
can be found here: www.tophat.com/pricing.

Course schedule
This table presents an overview of the course topics. For each unit, we will post a detailed day-­-by-­-day calendar on eLC.

Unit

Dates

Exam date

Antibiotic resistance

January 5 - January 31

Tuesday January 31

Human reproduction February 1 - February 23

Thursday February 23

Climate change

February 24 - March 28

Tuesday March 28

Losing biodiversity

March 29 - May 2

Thursday April 20

Final projects

Projects due: Thursday April 27 by 11 pm

Projects showcase (required): Tuesday May 2, 8 - 11 am

Other important dates:
Add-­-Drop ends: Wednesday January 11 Withdrawal Deadline: Monday March 20 Spring Break: March 6-­-10

THE DETAILS
How can I succeed in this course?
This course is different from a traditional biology course because we have different objectives than a traditional biology course. To succeed in this course, you will have to approach class time differently and you will have to study differently. Sitting quietly during class is not good enough. You benefit from answering questions and working with your group. Reading and copying notes from class and from the book will NOT prepare you for the exams. Those study strategies help you memorize facts. On exams in this course, you will need to apply concepts, which is more challenging. See the "Survival kit for succeeding in Biol 1104" in eLC to guide your studying. At the end of the semester, we ask BIOL 1104

2

students what advice they would give future students about succeeding in this class. A few themes emerge every semester:
I. COME TO CLASS EVERYDAY, PAY ATTENTION, AND PARTICIPATE. Students said: "The most important piece of advice is to come to class every day. So much information can be missed in just one day, and it can really take away from your understanding and ultimately your grade for the unit or class." "Do not be afraid to ask questions in class because more than likely other students probably have the same question. Dr. Andrews is always happy to help no matter what the question is!" "Pay attention in class and participate in the group activities. It will help you on the tests more than you know."
II. STUDY EARLY & OFTEN, AND DON'T FOCUS ON MEMORIZING. Students said: "Do not wait until the last minute to study. Also, take advantage of office hours to clarify and review any information you do not understand." "Don't focus on memorization, but processing the information. Stop in the middle of your readings and relate them back to different concepts." "Listen to what Dr. Andrews says about study tips." "Make sure you not only try to memorize facts, but apply them and use them in a real world situation. Think about why an answer is correct rather than simply accepting it's correct."
If you find yourself struggling in this course, please visit the "Survival kit for succeeding in Biol 1104" in eLC. We have put together some resources that previous students have found helpful. Students who are not doing as well as they would like generally need to change their study strategies. We ae always happy to meet with you in office hours to discuss your performance, but we expect you to first put in the effort use the resources we have created for this purpose.
What will I be doing to learn in and out of class?
1. Pre-­-class preparation: Pre-­-class preparation is required in this class. We expect you to learn the basics outside of class so we can work together to understand material more deeply in class. The unit calendars list the preparation required before each class meeting. Preparation will include reading sections of the textbook, reading articles and stories, listening to podcasts, and watching videos. All material you will need to prepare (e.g., readings, videos, etc.) will be available on eLC.
2. Notes: Powerpoint presentations will be posted on eLC the night before they are presented in class, so you can print them and bring them to class. Use them as a guide for your note-­-taking. Because you will have the slides, you will have to copy down less information. That gives you time to think more deeply about the material while in class. The exams will require you to do more than memorize information, so you should use your notes to think actively about the lecture material. Try to ask yourself the following questions during class: a. Why is this important? What is the context? What is the big idea? b. How does this connect to what I've previously learned? c. Is there evidence that would support this? Is there evidence against it? You should also write down any questions that the instructor is asking (rhetorically or directed towards students) and try to answer them. Also write down other students' questions and the answers given. If you miss class, use the slides to learn about what you missed. We will NOT respond to emails with the
3

question "What did I miss in class?" It is your responsibility to figure out what you missed in class using the resources on eLC and talking with your group members.
3. Personal electronic devices: Laptops and tablets will not be allowed in class except on "laptop" days. Laptop days will be announced on the unit calendar or in class. Phones will be used to answer in-­-class questions using Top Hat. If you are observed using your phone or other device for off-­-task activities, you may be asked to leave class. In that case, you will earn 0's on any in-­-class assignments and in-­-class questions.
4. Weekly eLC quizzes: Most weeks you will be responsible for completing a quiz in eLC. These assignments will be due Thursday at 8:00 am. Doing well on the weekly quizzes: The purpose of the quizzes is to hold you accountable for learning from the assigned preparation and for studying throughout the unit. You will have two attempts for each quiz and the best score you earn will be kept. You will learn the most if you complete the assigned preparation and study for at least 30 minutes after each class (see guides about how to study), take the weekly quiz to gauge your understanding, study more, and then take the quiz a 2nd time. You should be prepared to answer questions about anything that has been addressed in class and anything covered in the required preparation through the day of the quiz.
5. In-­-class questions: During class, you will be expected to think and answer questions. You will answer questions using Top Hat, the electronic response system Answers to in-­-class questions will be graded for effort. You will earn points based on the percent of questions to which you respond: 75 pts (full credit) for responding to 90% of the questions, 60 pts for responding to 80% of the questions, 52.5 pts for responding to 70% of the questions, etc. Top Hat: During class, we will use a web-­-accessible questioning tool called Top Hat (http://www.tophat.com). In class you will submit answers using your smart phone or texting phone, so bring them to class every day. If you do not already own a device that can be used with Top Hat, you can purchase an inexpensive prepaid cell phone to use to text in class. Starting Thursday January 12, I will expect everyone to have access to Top Hat. It is your responsibility to make sure your responses to Top Hat questions are recorded as you submit them. Please contact technical support if you are having problems (support@tophat.com)
6. Assignments: Some assignments will be completed in class, either alone or in collaboration with you group. Other assignments will be completed out of class. All assignments will be listed in the unit calendars.
7. Groups: Students learn more when they work in small groups of peers to discuss questions and solve problems. After the first week of class, you will sit with your group in an area designated by the instructor during each class period. I encourage you to get to know your group members because you will work with them throughout the semester. Collaborating with others is an important skill in most jobs, so we will encourage you and help you to solve problems within your group. If, after working with your group for at least two weeks, you have problems in your group, please notify us. We are not able to monitor the functioning of all groups, so we cannot help you unless us let us know what is occurring. Your group members will provide feedback about your participation and contributions in class. You will earn a grade based on this feedback and instructor observations.
9. Solo exams: Exams will be multiple-­-choice and open-­-response, with a focus on application and analysis (NOT memorization). There will be a total of four midterm exams. Your lowest solo exam score will be dropped. You must take each exam because you cannot take the group exam without first taking
4

the solo exam. If you miss an exam (for any reason), that exam will count as your dropped exam. Students who arrive to class more than 5 minutes after a test has begun will NOT be allowed to take the test and will receive a score of zero for both the solo and group exams.
10. Group exams: Sometimes students do not know they are confused until they see an exam question they do not know how to answer. Group tests offer one last chance to master the content and demonstrate knowledge and skills. For each of the exams given in this class, you will take the same test a second time, this time with your assigned group. In order to take the group test, you must first complete the solo test.
11. Final project: Your group will be responsible for completing a final project. The focus of this project is communicating about science to the public. As a group, you will have the freedom to make some decisions about the topic of your project. More details on the project will be available later in the semester. You will have some in-­-class time to work on this project, but you will also need to work on it outside of class. During the final exam period (Tuesday May 2), we will showcase some of the final projects. Plan to attend the full 3-­-hour final exam period.
What are the policies regarding missing class?
Attendance in class is essential. There may be times you will have to miss class because of an emergency or other commitment. We have structured the grading in this course to minimize the impact of missing a class for legitimate reasons by allowing you to miss up to 10% of the in-­-class questions and still earn full credit, and allowing 1 dropped assignment, 1 dropped eLC quiz, and 1 dropped solo exam, and 1 dropped group exam. Weekly quizzes, in-­-class questions, and exams cannot be made up under any circumstances. You do not need to email the instructor to report an absence, unless it is an exam day.

How will I be graded in this class?

You will be graded on your performance on course activities as follows:

Activity Total points

Details

% of overall grade

Solo exams

525

4 total, each worth 175 points, lowest dropped

52.5%

Group exams

75

4 total, each exam worth 25 points, lowest dropped

7.5%

Final project

175

Group project, including attendance at project

showcase

17.5%

Assignments

75

Worth variable amounts

7.5%

Weekly eLC

75

quizzes

13 total, 1 dropped

7.5%

In-­-class

75

Full credit for answering 90% of questions

questions

7.5%

Total

1000

100%

Your letter grade for the course will be calculated at the end of the semester and will be based on your final percentage. Your final percentage will be determined by adding the total number of points you have earned, dividing it by the total number of points you could have earned (1000 points), and multiplying by 100. I will use the following scale for determining letter grades:

F

D

C-­-

C

C+

B-­-

B

B+

A-­-

A

5

<60% 60-­-69% 70-­-73% 74-­-76% 77-­-79% 80-­-83% 84-­-86% 87-­-89% 90-­-93% 94-­-100%
Grading grievances: If you feel that there has been a mistake in your grade on an exam or another assignment, please email us immediately. We will not consider grading appeals beyond one week after we post assignment or exam scores. Franklin has a list of all appeal options for students. See: http://www.franklin.uga.edu/students/student_appeal_guidelines.php You may feel that you are just a point or two away from earning a higher grade, but I cannot with fairness add points to your score without affecting the grades of everyone else in the class. Changing your grade simply because you need a higher score is in violation of the Culture of Honesty guidelines of the University. You have many opportunities to earn points by completing course activities throughout the semester. Take advantage of those opportunities. If you have general questions about withdrawals versus dropped classes, final exam conflicts, missed classes for illness, or the Hope scholarship you can visit the Student Affairs Website and view the FAQ page: http://studentaffairs.uga.edu/students.htm.
CRITICAL INFORMATION
Academic Honesty and the Honor Code: Academic Honesty means performing all academic work without plagiarism, cheating, lying, tampering, stealing, giving or receiving unauthorized assistance from any other person, or using any source of information that is not common knowledge without properly acknowledging the source. The academic honesty policy of the University is supplemented (not replaced) by an Honor Code which was adopted by the Student Government Association and approved by the University Council May 1, 1997, and provides: I will be academically honest in all of my academic work and will not tolerate academic dishonesty of others. All students agree to abide by this code by signing the UGA Admissions Application. For more information on Academic Honesty and the Honor Code, please refer to: http://honesty.uga.edu/. More specifically, this commitment and statement means that you agree not to: · Log into another student's Top Hat account to answer questions for them. · Write someone's name on an assignment and turn it in if that person did not actually contribute to
the assignment. · Look at another person's exam or Scantron while taking an exam, even if you are just "checking to
see where that person is on the exam." · Cheat, lie, or plagiarize in any other way. If you have questions about an assignment and academic
integrity please ask me. Any person found using unauthorized assistance will be reported immediately to the Office of the Vice President for Instruction. The minimum penalty for using unauthorized assistance is a failing grade, and the maximum penalty is suspension from the University. Do not risk your academic future - it is simply not worth it!
Disability accommodations: Reasonable accommodations are available for students who have a disability. The Disability Resource Center in the Division of Student Affairs (114 Clark Howell Hall; 706-­- 542-­-8719 voice; 706-­-542-­-7719 fax; 706-­-542-­-8778 tty) coordinates accommodations and services for students with disabilities. Please notify the instructor of any accommodations needed for the course during the first week of the course.
6

Technology difficulties: It is your responsibility to make sure you have access to eLC and Top Hat. You will have adequate time to complete all of the assignments. If you wait until the last minute (less than 3 hours before it is due, or after 9 am -­- 5 pm business hours), we may not be able to help you. If you forget to complete an online quiz, it will not be available to make-­-up. You have control over your schedule and we expect you to organize and manage your time. · If you have any problems or questions about accessing eLC, you can contact the EITS Helpdesk: (706)
542-­-3106, or online at https://eits.uga.edu/support/request. You can find answers to questions about eLC at: https://d2lhelp.view.usg.edu/ · If you have any problems with accessing Top Hat, please contact their technical support by email: support@tophat.com or visit http://support.tophat.com · We will not consider technology excuses! You need to make sure you have a backup computer if your computer should be down at any time. You must have a phone with texting capabilities in each class period.
7

