Spring 2021 Principles of Biology I Laboratory (BIOL 1107L) Syllabus

eLC Module
Week 1

F2F: Face to Face AR: Asynchronous Remote SR: Synchronous Remote

Week Group of

Lab Topics/Assignments

Assignment Due Date

Jan 25

SR: Course Introduction & The Scientific Process A&B Assignment: Scientific Process (10 pts)

Due in Lab

Weeks 2 and 3

Feb 1 Feb 8

A F2F: The Scientific Process Assignment: Writing Methods (10 pts)
B AR: Introduction to Scientific Resources Assignment: Scientific Resources Assignment (10 pts)
A AR: Introduction to Scientific Resources Assignment: Scientific Resources Assignment (10 pts)

Week of 2/8 night before lab@9 pm
2/5 9 pm
2/12 9 pm

Week 4 Feb 15

Feb 22

Weeks 5 and 6

Mar 1

Week 7 Mar 8

Mar 15

Weeks 8 and 9

Mar 22

Week 10
Week 11

Mar 29 Apr 5

B A&B
A B A B A & B A B A B
A&B A&B

F2F: The Scientific Process Assignment: Writing Methods (10 pts) AR: Using Excel Assignment: Graphing with Excel (10 pts) F2F: Experimental Design - Qualitative Analysis Assignment: Qualitative Analysis Report (20 Pts) AR: Data analysis Assignment: Standard curves (10 pts) AR: Data analysis Assignment: Standard curves (10 pts) F2F: Experimental Design - Qualitative Analysis Assignment: Qualitative Analysis Report (20 pts) AR: Using Scientific Literature Assignment: Using Citations (10 pts) F2F: Experimental Design - Quantitative Analysis Assignment: Quantitative Analysis Report (20 pts) AR: Exploring Scientific Literature - Figures and Results Assignment: Scientific Article Analysis (10 pts)
AR: Exploring Scientific Literature - Figures and Results Assignment: Scientific Article Analysis (10 pts) F2F: Experimental Design - Quantitative Analysis Assignment: Quantitative Analysis Report (20 pts) SR: Molecular Applications - PCR & Bioinformatics Assignment: Molecular Applications Post Lab (10 pts)
AR: Practicing Science - Case it! Assignment: Case it! Study ID Assignment (10 pts)

Week of 2/15 night before lab@9 pm
2/19 9 pm Week of 3/1 night before lab@9 pm
2/26 9 pm
3/5 9 pm Week of 3/8 night before lab@9 pm
3/12 9 pm
Week of 3/22 night before lab@9pm
3/19 9 pm
3/26 9 pm Week of 3/29 night before lab@9pm Week of 4/5 night before lab@9pm
4/9 9 pm

Week 12

Apr 12

A&B SR: Gel Analysis Assignment: Gel Interpretation (10 pts) Assignment: Quantitative Analysis Revisions (30 pts)

Due in Lab 4/16 9 pm

Week April 19 A&B SR: Communicating Science

13

Assignment Due: Case it! Presentations (30 pts)

Due in Lab

The course syllabus is a general plan for the course; deviations may be necessary and will be announced in class and/or posted on eLC.

Spring 2021 Principles of Biology I Laboratory (BIOL 1107L) Syllabus

Course Objectives

Topics Covered
Throughout the semester we'll explore these topics while practicing stages of the scientific process within each one.
 Qualitative Analysis  Quantitative Analysis  Experimental Design  Molecular Applications  Scientific Writing  Communicating Science

Writing Intensive Course
BIOL 1107L is a Writing Intensive Course. It closely follows the guidelines established by The University of Georgia's Writing Intensive Program (WIP). Our goal in following these guidelines is to help you become better writers in your academic field of science, as writing and thinking are parallel cognitive (learning) processes. Writing engages individuals in the information being studied and therefore results in better retention of this subject material.

Need Help?
If you have general course questions or need help, contact biolabhelp@uga.edu for assistance. Please include your course and CRN or lab day/time in the subject line, this will help in assisting you and answering your questions. We understand that issues can cause frustration and we are open to hearing your concerns however we ask that you please keep all correspondence professional and polite.

Who's Who
BIOL Lab Program Coordinator: Kimberly Martin martinkim@uga.edu 706-542-1680
BIOL 1107L Lab Manager: Nick Nguyen ninja@uga.edu 706-542-8734
For your GLA contact information see the schedule posted in eLC with GLA name and email for your specific CRN.

The course syllabus is a general plan for the course; deviations may be necessary and will be announced in class and/or posted on eLC.

Spring 2021 Principles of Biology I Laboratory (BIOL 1107L) Syllabus
General Lab Format BIOL labs will begin the week of January 25th, all labs during that week will be Synchronous Remote
Face to Face Instruction: Approximately 50% of instruction will be face to face with classes delivered using a hybrid format that includes in person lab activities, synchronous remote instruction, and asynchronous remote instruction. In following with USG and CDC guidelines for social distancing we will be limiting the number of students in labs to 12 at a time effectively splitting each class into two groups. Students will be assigned to Group A or Group B in eLC after the add/drop period. See the Course Syllabus & Information under Table of Contents in eLC to find your assigned group. We do not have a completely remote option for this course.
Instructional Delivery of Course Content
 All course content/materials will be available through eLC. Any announcements about lab as well as any changes to the syllabus and/or assignments will be posted in eLC. You are responsible for checking eLC regularly for announcements and updates of content.
 For the Synchronous Remote (SR) instruction, you will meet virtually with your GLA during the day/time listed on your schedule in Athena. Your GLA will provide you with the information to access the meeting via Zoom. There will also be content posted in eLC for the Asynchronous Remote (AR) weeks, which students are expected to work independently on. This does not mean you are not able to seek assistance with the material from your GLA if you have questions.
Dress Code: In addition to the face covering requirement, while in lab students must also follow the dress code. Feet and legs must be completely covered. You must wear pants or a long skirt. Shorts, skirts, and open-toed/heeled shoes are NOT allowed. If you are dismissed from lab because of improper dress, it will count as an absence, refer to Attendance section for details. The BIOL Lab Program dress code is in compliance with the UGA policy found at http://research.uga.edu/docs/units/safety/manuals/Chemical-Laboratory-Safety-Manual.pdf on page 2-8, Section 2.IIII.K.
Course Materials
There are no additional texts/manuals needed for the course. A computer or tablet will be needed for the course with video conferencing capability for the synchronous remote instruction. Students need to obtain the Microsoft Office software for course work as all documents must be submitted in Word format. We will also use Excel during the course. The software for Mac and PC is available free to UGA students through EITS. See the link below for installation instructions. https://confluence.eits.uga.edu/display/HK/How+to+Install+Office+365+Pro
The course syllabus is a general plan for the course; deviations may be necessary and will be announced in class and/or posted on eLC.

Spring 2021 Principles of Biology I Laboratory (BIOL 1107L) Syllabus
Attendance
As a 1 credit course scheduled once a week, student success will be highly dependent on the engagement and participation in the class meetings and completing the asynchronous assignments in their entirety. Missing even one class means that you have missed a significant portion of the course and attendance will be recorded for the face to face and synchronous meeting labs.
If you are absent from class (in lab or synchronous) it is your responsibility to contact your GLA within 48 hours after the absence for content and assignment information. You must also provide valid documentation of the absence. You will still be expected to submit assignments on the posted due date unless approval has been received by the Lab Coordinator for a late submission. Valid excuses encompass: sickness/hospitalization (this includes COVID quarantine/isolation), family death, UGA associated academic/athletic events (this does not include advising appointments, practice sessions, or general meetings).
If you have contacted your GLA and submitted valid excuse documentation of your absence to the drop box in eLC within 2 days after the absence, that will be recorded as an excused absence. Failure to contact your GLA within the 2-day time period, or failure to submit appropriate documentation, will result in an unexcused absence and 10 points will be deducted from your total point score for the course.
*Students that have 3 or more absences will receive an F due to incompletion of the course* ALL absences, excused or unexcused, count toward the absence total.
Assignment Submission and Late Work
 All assignments will be submitted electronically by 9 pm EST on the designated due date to eLC dropboxes. Assignment submission should be as a word document (.docx) unless otherwise specified. Documents submitted in any other format will not be graded. It is the student's responsibility to review assignment submissions for accuracy and format. Submission documents that show up blank or corrupted will receive a grade of zero. Assignments can be resubmitted if this occurs but will be subject to the late work policy.
 Late assignments will have a 50% deduction of the assignment's total point value. Assignments will not be accepted for credit after 5 days past the due date. This applies to submission errors of documents originally submitted on time as well so be sure to check your assignment submissions carefully. If there are extenuating circumstances interfering with your completion of academic work please contact your GLA or the Lab Coordinator for assistance. The success of our students is a priority and we want to offer our students any available resources to assist with that.
The course syllabus is a general plan for the course; deviations may be necessary and will be announced in class and/or posted on eLC.

Spring 2021 Principles of Biology I Laboratory (BIOL 1107L) Syllabus

Final Grade Scale A (93%)
A- (90-93%) B+(88-89%) B (84-87%) B- (80-83%) C+ (76-79%) C (70-75%) D (60-69%)
F (<60%)

Grading Policy
You can earn a total of 200 possible points in this lab. More detailed assignment points are given in the Lab Outline below. The final letter grade is equal to your accumulated total points earned divided by 200 possible points. There will be no extra credit or bonus points given.
Any complaint about a grade must be brought to your GLA's attention, in written form with a thorough explanation as to why you disagree with the grade, within one week of the grade being posted. Under no circumstance will an assignment grade be changed after the last day of classes.

Communication: To comply with the Family Educational Rights and Privacy Act (FERPA), all communication that refers to individual students must be through UGA supported platforms and accounts. This would include written communication to be done via UGAMail and/or eLC and for video conferencing the use of Zoom. Instructors are not allowed to respond to messages that refer to individual students or student progress in the course through non-UGA accounts, phone calls, or social media.
Academic Honesty
UGA Student Honor Code: "I will be academically honest in all of my academic work and will not tolerate academic dishonesty of others." All academic work must meet the standards contained in "A Culture of Honesty", the University's policy and procedures for handling cases of suspected dishonesty, can be found at http://honesty.uga.edu. Students are responsible for informing themselves about those standards before performing any academic work. This includes using social media to share answers to course assignments, obtaining and/or using a previous student's assignment for reference (examples of Unauthorized Assistance). Any form of possible academic dishonesty will be reported to the UGA Office of the Vice President for Instruction.
All necessary information to complete the course work can be found within eLC. Use of outside website sources or other individuals is not allowed unless specifically required for the assignment (such as obtaining peer reviewed research articles for use in assignments). The use of Google, Course Hero, StuDoc, Chegg, and other student file sharing resources is prohibited and a violation of the Academic Honesty policy.

The course syllabus is a general plan for the course; deviations may be necessary and will be announced in class and/or posted on eLC.

Spring 2021 Principles of Biology I Laboratory (BIOL 1107L) Syllabus
Addressing COVID-19
The safety of our students is a priority for the BIOL Lab Program. We comply with wearing a face covering, practicing social distancing, health self-monitoring, and respecting the concerns of others. Following these guidelines minimizes the spread of the virus and protects our community. In class, students are to comply with face covering requirements unless exempted by an accommodation request through the Disability Resource Center. The use of a face covering will be in addition to and is not a substitute for social distancing. Anyone not using a face covering when required will be asked to wear one or must leave the area. Repeated refusal to comply with the requirement may result in discipline through the student code of conduct. We appreciate your cooperation and upholding your part to keep everyone safe.
In Class Safety Measures: Lab seating has been reconfigured to accommodate the 6ft social distancing space, there is a maximum of 12 students seated 2 per bench in the lab rooms. Students will need to obtain a disinfecting wipe available at stations located in the hallways prior to entering the lab room and wipe their work area down. Each of the lab room doors has been designated as either an entry door or exit door and we ask students to follow this traffic flow accordingly. Additionally, the application of any make up, lip balm, or consumption of food and drink (including gum) are not allowed in lab.
We Care About YOU!
Mental Health and Wellness Resources
 If you or someone you know needs assistance, you are encouraged to contact Student Care and Outreach in the Division of Student Affairs at 706-542-7774 or visit https://sco.uga.edu. They will help you navigate any difficult circumstances you may be facing by connecting you with the appropriate resources or services.
 UGA has several resources for a student seeking mental health services (https://www.uhs.uga.edu/bewelluga/bewelluga) or crisis support (https://www.uhs.uga.edu/info/emergencies).
 If you need help managing stress anxiety, relationships, etc., please visit BeWellUGA (https://www.uhs.uga.edu/bewelluga/bewelluga) for a list of FREE workshops, classes, mentoring, and health coaching led by licensed clinicians and health educators in the University Health Center.
 Additional resources can be accessed through the UGA App.
The course syllabus is a general plan for the course; deviations may be necessary and will be announced in class and/or posted on eLC.

