BIOL 1108 :: Principles of Biology II :: Syllabus Fall 2022
The important thing in science is not so much to obtain new facts as to discover new ways of thinking about them. - William Lawrence Bragg

Class Information

Credit hours: 3

Location:

Science Learning Center

Time:

TTh 9:35-10:50 OR 11:10 - 12:25

Class website: eLC

https://uga.view.usg.edu/

Instructor Information
Dr. Dorset W. Trapnell dorset@uga.edu
Miller Plant Sciences, Rm 3508 Office Hours: By appointment only
Tel: 706-542-6506
Dr. Mark A. Farmer mfarmer@uga.edu 100 Biological Sciences Office Hours: By appointment only Tel: 706-583-8111

Key Points
 We will not respond to an email that is addressed in this syllabus.
 The course syllabus is a general plan for the course; deviations may be necessary, which will be announced to the class by the instructor.
 Keep up with your out-of-class assignments. All In the News (ITN), PackBack, and SimBio assignments MUST be completed in a timely manner. Late submissions will NOT be accepted except in the case of excused circumstances.
 Do NOT contact us regarding any technical difficulties you might experience with eLC, Packback, or Simbio. Instead contact:
Packback (Support for issues related to PackBack - Holla@packback.co )
SimBio (Support for issues related to SimBio - http://simutext.zendesk.com )
eLC (Support for issues related to eLC - http://ctl.uga.edu/elc )
 For questions about reviewing your exams please contact Ms. Andrea Funk (Room 403A Biological Sciences Bldg.) 706-542-1684 or email andreafunk@uga.edu
 Be aware of what is required to keep your professionalism points  Be aware of the Appropriate Use of Technology Policy

1

Welcome to BIOL 1108: Principles of Biology II:
For the next 15 weeks you will be learning about biology. The purpose of this course is to build on and complement knowledge you acquired in BIOL 1107. Where BIOL 1107 focused on the nature of how information affects biological systems at all levels, we will be stressing how energy flows through biological systems, from the origin of biomolecules to the creation of complex ecosystems.
In order for you to get the most out of this course, it is important for you to understand our philosophy. We will not be teaching biology to you but instead we will be helping you to understand and learn biology. You might be asking "What's the difference?" and, in a word, the difference is YOU. Learning is an active process, not a passive one. It is our job to provide you with the resources you will need to succeed; the readings, the lectures, the videos, the discussions, the out-of-class exercises, the podcasts, etc. And we will provide guidance, answering questions when you are confused and helping you make sense of the information. But ultimately it is up to you, not us, to learn the material. We will lay out a path that we feel will help you to succeed in this quest, but you are the one undertaking this journey. If you choose to skip the readings, if you choose to not complete the homework exercises, if you choose to not to engage with the PowerPoint lectures, if you choose to not work with your classmates in ways that we recommend, well then ultimately those are your choices. You are an adult and as an adult you are free to make choices about your life. But we hope that you have chosen this class because you genuinely wish to have a deeper understanding of biology and in order to achieve that understanding you will have to make the effort. We are here to lay out a path for you and assist, but it is you who must do the work. We think biology is utterly fascinating and when you understand biological principles you have a valuable framework for understanding the world around you that will serve you well for the rest of your life, regardless of your profession. We genuinely hope you enjoy the next 15 weeks of exploration.
It is also important that you understand why we teach the material as we do. We do not march through chapters in a textbook in a linear fashion. Instead, our approach is to point out linkages and connections in the material. Biology is more of an interconnected web than a linear series of topics. Atoms effect molecules which effect cells which effect tissues which effect other molecules which effect other cells.... Topics that are covered in the first weeks of class will come up over and over again as all of biology is interrelated. Our use of the "In the News" assignments are NOT meant to be add-ons or extraneous material. They are the central part of the course and are intentionally integrated into the curriculum to teach, and reinforce, general concepts in biology. Do NOT make the mistake of concentrating on the "lectures" and dismissing the ITN assignments.
Laboratory: Participation in BIOL 1108 requires concurrent enrollment in both 1108 (lecture) and 1108L (lab) classes or prior completion of BIOL 1108L. Students who do not enroll in both the lecture and the lab classes (or have lab credit) without permission from the Biology Division will be administratively dropped from the lecture course.
2

I. Course Aims and Objectives:

Aims 1)
2)
3)

Help you learn how to think like a scientist and to use your skills to address questions and problems in an objective, evidence-based manner. Develop the ability to find, read, and interpret primary literature and to critically evaluate the quality of data presented. Determine/understand the morphological, physiological, and behavioral characteristics that have allowed organisms to be evolutionarily successful within their abiotic and biotic environments.

Specific Learning Objectives:
By the end of this course, you will be able to: 1) Describe how organisms are adapted through evolution to make use of available resources
and compete with other organisms for those resources. 2) Synthesize how organisms at all different levels (e.g. microbes, fungi, plants and animals)
function in relation to their ecological interactions 3) Apply your knowledge to formulate and answer scientific questions.

II. Format and Procedures:
Due to the unusual circumstances associated with the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic we are asking for all students (vaccinated and unvaccinated) to consider wearing a face covering when in the classroom and lobby outside the classroom. This is meant to not only protect you, but more importantly to protect your fellow classmates, some of whom may be unable to receive the vaccine due to health or religious reasons. We will be meeting face to face in a classroom where social distancing will be difficult, so we ask that you show respect for your fellow students and your instructors by adhering to these requests. If you are a science major or aspire to a career in healthcare, the importance of containing the spread of COVID-19 should be self-evident to you.

Due to the likelihood of students needing to recover from illness, quarantine, or miss class for other reasons we will not be requiring in-person attendance. Each week we will make the presented materials (PowerPoints, readings & videos) available on eLC for you to use for studying. In addition, each class section will be recorded and be made available for up to seven days on the ZOOM platform. Links to the recorded ZOOM presentations will be made available AFTER class but will not be simulcast (e.g. hybrid class). Not everything will be included in these materials so your participation in class sessions is an important part of your learning. When you are reviewing the PowerPoints or watching assigned videos, we strongly recommend that you take notes by hand, as the act of physically writing helps you engage with the material and improves learning. Passively watching recorded sessions or videos is NOT a good way to learn the material. Re-writing or typing your notes is also a good study strategy, as it will help you think through and organize what you have learned.

3

To help you think through ideas and engage with your peers, we will be assigning each of you to a work group of three to four students. Midway through the semester you will be assigned to a different gourp. Your group will provide a core of people with whom you can discuss ideas during class, homework assignments (as well as SimBio), and as study partners. A small portion of your final grade will also be determined by performance on Group Exams taken with your group members. Because we all learn in different ways and have unique perspectives, exchanging ideas with your group members will help all of you learn. We think you will find that you learn best when sharing your understanding of a topic with others. Your group members are also a great resource to turn to when you have questions about a confusing topic in class or if you are not sure when something is due, etc. We will provide more details about groups below.
Class Resources:
 eLC: We will rely heavily on the class website (https://uga.view.usg.edu/). We will use this site to communicate announcements, administer quizzes, chat with each other, discuss questions in the forum, and for submission of writing assignments. We will post additional resources for the class within the "Content" tab. Your grades / scores can be found on the site's "Grades" tab.
 Textbook: OpenStax Biology, a free .pdf version of the text can be downloaded here: https://openstax.org/details/books/biology-2e We will not be relying on the text and you should consider it only to be a supplementary resource. Since we will be presenting materials in a more expansive manner you will be expected to find those sections of the text that best reinforce the material covered in class. A common mistake is to read and reread OpenStax hoping to master the material in our course. Do not make this mistake!
 Posted Resources. Important class resources will be posted to the course website within the "Content" section of eLC. This includes PowerPoints, additional readings (.pdf files), videos, and handouts. You are responsible for keeping up with the material posted to the eLC website.
 E-mail: If you wish to send us an email, you MUST type "BIOL 1108 - your specific topic" in the subject line. Also indicate which class period you are in. We use a special filter that routes all course emails to a single folder and if you neglect to include "BIOL 1108" in the subject line it is likely that your email will go unanswered. We will NOT respond to questions that are covered in the syllabus. If you have a legitimate question or concern, we will make every effort to respond to your emails within 24 48 hours. To comply with the Family Educational Rights and Privacy Act (FERPA), we will not respond to any communication sent via a non-UGA account. Also, please note that messages sent through eLC will go to your MyID@uga.edu email address, so be sure to check this account at least once each day. However, if you simply hit "reply" to an eLC message it will NOT reach us. Use the email addresses at the beginning of the syllabus.
4

Work Groups:
Many studies have shown that students learn best when they work in small groups of peers to discuss issues and solve problems. You will be assigned to a group of 3 - 4 students. We encourage you to get to know your group members because you will work closely with them throughout the semester. Collaborating with others is an important skill in most jobs, regardless of the field. If you experience problems within your group, we are available to help you find a solution. For all exams except Exam #5 (during finals week) there will also be a group exam that must be completed in consultation with your group members as each group will submit a single answer sheet and each member will receive the same grade for that part of the exam. Studies show that the likelihood of selecting the correct answer increases when a variety of diverse opinions are expressed.
As an incentive at least some of the questions used on our individual exams will come from members of the class. Before each exam we will invite your workgroup to submit a single multiple-choice exam question that you wrote (do not copy from the internet). Each member of a work group that submits a multiple-choice question will receive 10 bonus points. That means that you can earn up to 50 bonus points simply by getting together with your group mates and submitting a question before each exam. The person submitting the question must attest that all group members contributed in some way to the question so that no one is freeloading. We will choose the best question (or questions) from those submitted and use it/them on the exam. If your group submitted a question that is then included on an exam you almost certainly will get it correct!
Assignments (In and Out-of-Class Activities):
The purpose of these assignments is to keep you thinking about biology both in and out of the classroom. They are not meant to be busy work. Rather, each assignment is meant to help you sharpen your written, oral, and reasoning skills to help your mind stay focused and engaged on the topics we discuss in class. These assignments also allow you to opportunities to earn a substantial number of points outside of the exam setting.
 In The News (ITN):
Most weeks we will explore some aspect of biology that has come up in recent news reports. On Thursday of each week we will introduce some issue that is influencing the news that has a connection to biology. This could be anything from the outbreak of a disease to policy changes coming out of Washington, D.C. You will be responsible for looking into this issue, finding and reading at least two primary literature articles* that are relevant to the topic, reading the papers and writing a brief synopsis of the papers or asking a question related to the two papers. The papers you select and your write-up should focus on the biological aspects of the topic and you should write about it from the perspective of a biologist.
*Articles from the popular press (e.g. newspapers, magazines, blogs, or other non-peer reviewed sources) are useful places to start your search for information but they are not
5

considered primary literature. For example an article from Science News (https://www.sciencenews.org/ ) might get you started but is not the same as an article from the peer-reviewed journal Science (https://www.sciencemag.org/ ). A good starting point to find primary literature is found here: http://www5.galib.uga.edu/research/ You may work with your classmates in finding, reading and discussing the papers, and you may use the same papers, but each student is responsible for submitting their own individual write-up. Submissions that are identical or nearly identical constitute plagiarism and are a violation of UGA's Academic Honesty Policy. Also, as specified in the syllabus, your write-up should not simply be a recapping of the highlight of the paper (e.g. synopsis of the abstract) but instead should address "...important points that you learned from reading the articles".
Each write-up should include full references for two peer-reviewed papers that were used to inform you about the subject. Please use the APA citation (https://pitt.libguides.com/citationhelp/apa7 ). In addition to the two references, you must mention at least two important points that you learned from reading the articles (refer to the ITN grading rubric on eLC). These two references and the two important points must be uploaded as a Word document file (.doc or .docx) to eLC before 11:59 PM on the following Monday for you to be awarded points. Any missed or late assignments will receive no points. Do not wait until 11:59 PM to upload the assignment in case there is a glitch with your internet. We will NOT award points for late submissions. During the week after submission of an ITN assignment, we will cover the topic in more depth in class. This ITN material presented in class will be included on the exams. There will be one practice ITN and a total of at least twelve (12) graded ITN assignments during the semester, each worth 15 points. Only the highest eleven (11) ITN grades will count towards your final grade. So, if you miss one week there will be no academic penalty but neither is there an opportunity for late or make-up assignments.
 Packback Questions:
Participation is a requirement for this course, and the Packback Questions platform will be used for online discussion about class topics. Packback Questions is an online community where you can be fearlessly curious and ask open-ended questions to build on top of what we are covering in class and relate topics to real-world applications.
Packback Requirements: Your participation on Packback will count toward 11% of your overall course grade.
Packback submissions will be due weekly at 11:59 PM on Sundays but can be submitted at ANY time during the week. In order to receive points each week, you should submit the following:
 1 open-ended question per week each worth 33.3% of that week's grade  2 responses per week each worth 66.7% of that week's grade
How to Register on Packback: An email invitation will be sent to you from help@packback.co prompting you to finish registration. If you don't receive an email (be sure to check your spam), you may register by
6

doing the following:
1. Create an account by navigating to https://questions.packback.co and clicking "Sign up for an Account". Note: If you already have an account on Packback you can log in with your credentials.
2. Then enter our class community's lookup key into the "Looking to join a community you don't see here?" section in Packback at the bottom of the homepage. Community lookup key: 0b57f689-3883-4ed4-ab87-18b8951a7e52
3. Follow the instructions on your screen to finish your registration.
Packback may require a paid subscription. Refer to www.packback.co/product/pricing for more information.
How to Get Help from the Packback Team: If you have any questions or concerns about Packback throughout the semester, please read their FAQ at help.packback.co. If you need more help, contact their customer support team directly at help@packback.co.
For a brief introduction to Packback Questions and why we are using it in class, watch this video: vimeo.com/packback/Welcome-to-Packback-Questions
 SimBio Exercises:
Throughout the semester we will be doing a set of SimBio exercises (http://simbio.com/). You will need to sign up for this service on-line (details in syllabus). We encourage you to work with others and if you wish you may have "SimBio" submission parties where you get together to discuss the questions before submitting the answers. Even if you work with your classmates each student must submit their own final answers to receive individual grades. Also, be sure to answer all the non-graded questions in SimBio as failing to do so may compromise your ability to submit your answers to graded questions.
It is important that you review the information below before you subscribe to the SimUText for Principles of Biology II at University of Georgia. To avoid possible problems, do not wait until the last minute.
1. CHECK YOUR TECH!
Visit https://simutext.zendesk.com/hc/en-us/categories/200170134-Check-Your-Tech- to confirm that the SimUText application will work on your computer, and/or to explore your options if there is a problem.
2. SimUText Voucher Code (optional)
If you purchased a SimUText Voucher from your bookstore, be sure to have it with you when subscribing, as you will need to enter your voucher code.
3. Registration Link
When you are ready to subscribe and download installers, follow this link to initiate the process: https://www.simutext2.com/student/register.html#/key/U3VH-Ge63-hSCA-CU3WeSaG
7

4. SimUText Application Installers
After you have completed the subscription process, if you need to download the SimUText application installers again, you will be able to access them by logging into the SimUText Student Portal (https://www.simutext2.com/student/).
Save this email! Should you encounter problems, you may need your course-specific Access Key. It is: U3VH-Ge63-hSCA-CU3W-eSaG
Problems or questions? Visit SimUText Support (http://simbio.com/support/simutext)
Material covered in the SimBio exercises will be included on your exams.
NOTE: If you are facing financial difficulties and have trouble covering the costs of either PackBack or SimBio please email Dr. Farmer as resources may be available on a limited basis.
 Professionalism Points: Employers and professional schools (e.g. medical, allied health, veterinary, dental, and pharmacy) have reported that many graduating students are lacking in professionalism. Consequently, you will be encouraged to act professionally in Biology 1108. Everyone begins with ten (10) professionalism points that are yours to keep, unless you lose them over the course of the semester. To keep these points you must:
Be courteous while in lecture and lab. It is unprofessional to talk while your professor or guest lecturer is speaking or for you to unnecessarily disrupt a class exercise. It is also inappropriate to violate the Appropriate Use of Technology Policy (see below).
Send professional e-mails with proper subjects, greetings and closings. E-mails should have a subject that describes the reason for contacting the recipient. "Biology" is too vague, but "BIOL 1108: NY Times article on cloning" would be better. There should be a salutation. "Hey!" or "I was wondering..." is not appropriate, "Dear Dr. Farmer," would be best. There should be a closing/signature. "Betsy" is not enough, "Sincerely, Betsy Beauchamp" would be better. Because of the size of this class, please include your ID number, the course number (BIOL 1108), and which time your class is (we are teaching two sections of 1108) in all e-mail correspondence and only send them from your MyID@uga.edu account. Because of FERPA and privacy restrictions we will NOT respond to emails sent from a non-UGA address.
Read your syllabus and be responsible for all the information in it. You should be familiar with everything in this syllabus. A copy will be available all semester on eLC. It is unprofessional to ask a question whose answer is clearly stated in the syllabus. If something in the syllabus is unclear ask one of your work group members or post to the eLC message board to find out how your classmates interpret it.
Treat everyone involved in this course with respect. You should be courteous to every member of this course: your classmates as well as your instructors. Wearing a face covering if you are not vaccinated against COVID-19 is one way to demonstrate this respect.
8

Be dressed appropriately. You are not required to be in business professional attire, as is required by many medical schools or similar professional programs however, we expect certain minimum standards. Do not wear tee shirts with inappropriate language and do not come to class in pajamas or slippers. Do not wear hats in class nor clothing that visibly reveals undergarments.
 Appropriate Use of Technology Policy (AUTP):
During class you are encouraged to use any form of technology (cell phone, laptop, tablet, Edison talking machine, etc.) that will a) enhance your learning experience and b) will not negatively affect the learning experience of any of the other students. What is NOT acceptable is the use of technology during class for activities that are unrelated to the course. This includes, but is not limited to, shopping, watching sports, checking social media, emailing, talking, texting, playing games, watching movies or TV, or doing work for another class. When you attend class in BIOL 1108 your attention should be focused on THIS class. Not only is it distracting to others around you, but it is also a waste of your time and demonstrates a disrespect for our efforts to create a productive learning environment. At this point in your life being a student is your full-time job. It is not acceptable to do other things when you are employed in a job and it is not acceptable for you to do other things in our classroom when you should be focused on learning biology. If you have assignments that are due in another class and you feel the need to work on them during our class, then please go and work on them elsewhere.
A violation of the Appropriate Use of Technology Policy (AUTP) will result in your receiving a Technology Citation. You will be asked to sign the citation, acknowledging that the AUTP was made clear to you both through this syllabus as well as in discussion on the first day of class. Each citation will result in the loss of three (3) points from your professionalism points total score. This is roughly the equivalent of missing one multiple choice question on an exam. It is our sincere hope that we will not have to issue a single citation this semester, so please take the AUTP seriously and ask us beforehand if you are at all unclear about our expectations.
Technology Citation
I ______________________________________________ had been informed of the appropriate use of technology policy (AUTP) for BIOL 1108. By signing this citation I confirm that I knowingly violated the AUTP and that I accept the penalty of having three (3) points deducted from my total point score for the semester. I further acknowledge that each additional violation of the AUTP will result in additional point deductions.

__________________________________ ______________________________

Signature

Student ID #

9

 Class Participation:
To maintain class engagement we will be carrying out interactive lessons in class. We understand that there will be times when you may not be able to attend class in person. To facilitate your learning and so that you do not miss out on any of what is covered in class we will be recording each class and posting a link to that recording to eLC. You will have up to seven days to watch this recording. If you have a known conflict coming up please let us know ahead of time so that we can work with you for an accommodation.
 Exams:
With the exception of the final exam, all exams will be administered in person and will be administered through eLC. This will require each of you to bring a laptop or tablet with you on exam days. If a laptop or tablet is not available to you please let us know and a loaner computer will be provided for the purpose of taking the exam. Without prior approval you will NOT be permitted to take the exam anywhere except in the assigned classroom under the supervision of a proctor.
There will be a total of five (5) individual unit exams, one of which will be administered during finals period. All exams are mandatory and will be administered only in person during the scheduled times. Exams will consist of multiple choice questions as well as short answer questions. You will have at least 60 minutes to complete the individual unit exam. You will be allowed to drop the grade from one (1) individual exam without any reason (no excused absences, no doctor's notes, etc.). There will be no make-up exams for any reason. This means that if you do poorly on the first exam and then something happens during the semester that negatively impacts one of your later exams you will still only get to drop ONE exam score. So make every exam count. If you are satisfied with your performance on the first four individual exams the fifth exam is not mandatory and may count as your dropped exam score.
If any of the scheduled exams conflict with a religious holiday or other excused absence we are willing to work arrange for you to take the exam early. You must contact us at least one week before the scheduled exam date. Only for documented cases where two or more exams are entirely missed for reasons of illness, jury duty, University business, or family emergencies will accommodations be made. All such cases must be approved through UGA Student Care and Outreach | 706-542-8220 | 325 Tate Center (http://dos.uga.edu/studentsupport/).
Do NOT ask Dr. Farmer or Dr. Trapnell to make a determination as to what qualifies as an excused absence. This must be done through the Student Care and Outreach office. We will then take their recommendations into consideration.
Check your exams in a timely manner: All exam scores will be uploaded to the Grades section of eLC. Because there will be short answer questions that must be manually graded your accurate exam score will not be immediately available to you. After exam scores are released you will have up to five working days after an exam to submit a detailed, written re-grade request if you feel that a question
10

was incorrectly graded. Such re-grade requests should be emailed to both Dr. Farmer and Dr. Trapnell. The deadline for requesting a re-grade request is intended to avoid last minute requests late in the semester. If you feel that you were unfairly graded then you should raise the issue with us immediately after getting your exam back. With the exception of arithmetic errors, re-grade requests made later than five working days after exams are returned will not be considered. Keep in mind that re-grading could potentially lead to a lower rather than a higher grade so be quite certain before you make this request. Exams will NOT be available for the 24 hours immediately preceding the final exam, so plan accordingly.
Group Exams:
In addition to the individual exams, you will take a group exam after the individual exams are completed. This will be done with your workgroup members in the classroom. A single answer sheet will be submitted and each group member will receive the same grade for the group exam. You must be physically present and sign the group exam answer sheet to receive credit.
III. Grades will be based on:

ASSIGNMENT

Points

%

Professionalism points (10 pts)

10

1%

In The News* (11 assignments x 15 pts)

165

14%

PackBack Questions (13 questions/26 answers)

130

11%

SimBio** (4 exercises X 30 pts)

120

10%

Individual Exams (4*** exams x 160 pts)

640

52%

Group Multiple-Choice Exams (3 exams**** X 50 pts each)

150

12%

Total

Grade Distribution:

A

94-100%

A-

90-93 %

B+

87-89 %

B

83-86 %

B-

80-82 %

C+

77-79 %

C

73-76 %

C-

70-72 %

D

60-69 %

F

< 60 %

1215 100%

11

* There will be at least twelve graded ITNs but only the top eleven will count towards your final grade. ** Points are awarded based on a percentage of correctly completed questions in each assignment. There is not necessarily a one-to-one point correspondence. *** There will be five unit exams but only the top four individual exams scores will count towards your final grade. **** There will be four group exams but only the top three scores will count towards your final grade.
Late assignments will receive a zero.
All grades will be posted on the course eLC website. At the end of the semester if the class's average score falls below 75% we will adjust grades so that the average is no lower than a letter grade of "C".
Absences: Although attendance will not be taken attendance is encouraged. If you miss an exam, you will receive a zero for that exam. Only documented cases of personal illness, University business, or family emergencies or events (e.g., death, grave illness,) will be accommodated. For documented cases of excused absence, accommodations may be reached or subsequent exams will be pro-rated (i.e. your remaining exams will count for more points). Please discuss your personal situation with one us as soon as possible!
If circumstances during the semester lead to an extended absence we will try to accommodate you and help you to make up for missed assignments as best we can. Please bear in mind that students who are experiencing difficulties may withdraw from the course at any time with no academic penalty. This can be initiated by the student up to the regular withdrawal deadline. After the regular withdrawal deadline students may still avail themselves of a hardship withdrawal by contacting the office of Student Care and Outreach. https://sco.uga.edu/sco/hardship-withdrawals
IV. Academic Integrity You are expected to complete and turn in your own work. This includes online assignments, exams, and group assignments. Yes, you are encouraged to work with study partners outside of class, but unless otherwise specified, any material that you submit must be from your own brain and in your own words. When turning in a written assignment please cite sources when using ideas and information that are not your own, or not common knowledge (follow the format used in the 1108 lab). If you are unsure when you should use a citation please ask first! UGA takes academic honesty very seriously, and so do we. There is no short-term or long-term reward for cheating.
12

As a University of Georgia student, you have agreed to abide by the University's academic honesty policy, UGA Student Honor Code: "I will be academically honest in all of my academic work and will not tolerate academic dishonesty of others." A Culture of Honesty, the University's policy and procedures for handling cases of suspected dishonesty, can be found at www.uga.edu/ovpi.
V. Accommodations for students with disabilities Students with disabilities who require reasonable accommodations in order to participate in course activities or meet course requirements should contact the instructor. For those registered with the DRC we will make arrangements for you to take your exams at the DRC.
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
VI. Mental Health and Wellness Resources:
 If you or someone you know needs assistance, you are encouraged to contact Student Care and Outreach in the Division of Student Affairs at 706-542-7774 or visit https://sco.uga.edu. They will help you navigate any difficult circumstances you may be facing by connecting you with the appropriate resources or services.
 UGA has several resources for a student seeking mental health services (https://www.uhs.uga.edu/bewelluga/bewelluga) or crisis support (https://www.uhs.uga.edu/info/emergencies).
 If you need help managing stress anxiety, relationships, etc., please visit BeWellUGA (https://www.uhs.uga.edu/bewelluga/bewelluga) for a list of FREE workshops, classes, mentoring, and health coaching led by licensed clinicians and health educators in the University Health Center.
 Additional resources can be accessed through the UGA App.
VII. How to Study and Succeed in BIOL 1108 The one question we are most often asked is "How can I prepare for the exams?" There are two approaches to this. The first is known as passive learning, and includes things such as reviewing notes, reviewing class presentations/case studies, reading the papers that are uploaded in eLC, etc. The second approach is active learning and this includes strategies such as explaining things to others, applying concepts to new situations, creating exam questions for yourself and/or your classmates, etc. Just about everyone participates in passive learning but the students who perform best in BIOL 1108 also employ active learning. We hope that all of you will do both.
Learning takes work. Learning how to apply knowledge takes even more work and it also takes practice. Here are a few study strategies we recommend.
 Attend class. Stay engaged with the material and actively participate in class to help you think through the concepts we are covering. Even if an example is perfectly clear to you, try to think of other examples that involve the same biological concept. How 13

would you apply new data to match a key concept covered in class? Very little of this sort of critical thinking can be achieved just from reading a textbook, so do not rely solely on the assigned readings for all of your learning.
 Be disciplined: You will be spending less than three hours per week in class. We expect you to spend at least an additional 12-15 hours per week outside of class reviewing material, completing assignments, reading, and most importantly thinking about how you would interpret new data based on the concepts you have learned. Use the class schedule to make a study calendar for yourself (e.g. what will you study when and for how long?).
 Make an outline of class notes every day: One thing that worked well for us when studying was outlining the major topics and especially the new vocabulary associated with each of those topics. This helps you see how the different concepts fit together. Creating outlines for each lesson might provide a good framework for you, within which you can add details when we cover them in class. Make a glossary that you update every time you hear a new term.
Additionally, consider the following questions when developing your outline: o What are the important (take-home) messages for this lesson? o What are the examples used to support/explain each important point? If these examples are experiments, what were the hypotheses and conclusions of these experiments? o Why does this lesson matter (e.g. how can the information be applied? How does it connect to, and build on, previous lessons? How did the lesson fit into the course and specific learning objectives?)? o What questions do you have (i.e. identify gaps in your understanding)?
When studying for the Unit exams, you might develop a broader outline to think about how the main concepts from that Unit relate to one another and fit within the learning objectives.
 Read and write every day: While some find it helpful to read the relevant materials before engaging with the lecture material, do not make the mistake of over-relying on the textbook. Exam questions will mostly come from material covered in the PowerPoints, the case studies or in one of the out-of-class activities (e.g. SimBio). And yes, the material covered in "In the News" is definitely going to be covered on exams. Every day ask yourself, "Which concepts were emphasized?" When outlining concepts, make connections between the things we covered in class and those in the materials on eLC. Try and identify any gaps in your understanding and formulate questions. Think about examples that are especially important, and why.
 Create your own glossary. After every class write down all those terms that are new to you or you are uncertain about, look up their definitions, and write out a definition of those new terms. In the PowerPoints we try to bold those words that we feel are 14

essential to know. You cannot speak the language of biology unless you know what the words mean and then correctly use them in a sentence. "Photosynthesis" is not the same as "photosynthetic." "Metabolism" is not the same as "metabolic." If you and your workgroup members share your glossaries with each other this becomes an excellent study tool to share, quiz each other with, and help you prepare for exams.
 Practice: Once you have completed the assigned readings/viewings and revised your notes, practice using your knowledge by creating your own multiple-choice questions and then sharing them with other students. Many of the points in this course will come from correctly answering multiple choice questions. Writing a good multiple-choice exam question is harder than it seems and requires a deep understanding of the material. Sharing and answering sample questions that you develop with your work group is an excellent way to prepare for the exams. This can be done in person or simply emailing each other the questions you came up. The simple act of writing out questions will help you learn the material more deeply. Challenge each other as if you were taking one of our exams. This will help you gauge if you have a firm understanding of the broader concepts. Treat the practice questions as if they were exam questions, to help you see if you are prepared for the exam. Be certain to follow up with the person who wrote the sample question for those questions that you got wrong. It is possible that you know the material so well that you thought of an exception that the question writer did not consider. BOTH of you will learn something from the exchange. Plan to write and answer a few practice questions every week! Do not wait until the night before the exam to attempt the practice questions.
 Be Organized: The best way to stay organized is to have a plan and execute it. You will generate a lot of paper in this class (lesson notes, vocabulary lists, practice questions, reading notes, etc.). During the first week of class figure out a way to keep all of your documents together in one place in order to reference them quickly. We find 3-ring binders helpful for organizing, however, there are many other ways to organize information - just choose a system that works for you!
 Get Help: Finally if you are having trouble please ask for help; we are happy to set up a time to meet with you. Please e-mail us at least 24 hours before you want to set up an appointment. Before meeting with one of us ask yourself "Have I tried the techniques suggested in the syllabus? Have I talked to my group and sought their advice?" We will typically ask that you bring your class notes, your study outlines, the practice questions you have written and your personal glossary to the meeting so that we can review these things with you.
 You may also seek out assistance from the Division of Academic Enhancement. The Division of Academic Enhancement (DAE) offers free peer tutoring in over 100 of UGA's most rigorous courses including writing tutoring. To engage with a tutor, download the Penji app, available on iOS and Android, and create an account using your MyID@uga.edu email address. Don't have a smart phone? Navigate to
15

https://web.penjiapp.com and create an account using your MyID@uga.edu email address. Need help? Visit our website for more information on how to engage with a tutor or email us at tutor@uga.edu In addition to peer tutoring, the DAE also provides Academic Coaching, Student Success Workshops and more. The DAE is committed to the success of all students at the University of Georgia. For more on these and other resources, please visit https://dae.uga.edu
Coronavirus Information for Students
Face Coverings:
Variants of the SARS-CoV-2 virus are still present in the Athens community. Students are strongly encouraged to wear face coverings regardless of their vaccination status. Studies have shown that while all approved vaccines are effective in preventing severe illness from COVID-19 they do not necessarily prevent an individual from becoming infected and accidently spreading it to others. For your safety, and for the safety of others, we request that you wear a face covering when in class or when in lab.
DawgCheck:
Please perform a quick symptom check each weekday on DawgCheck--on the UGA app or website--whether you feel sick or not. It will help health providers monitor the health situation on campus: https://dawgcheck.uga.edu/
What do I do if I have symptoms?
Students showing symptoms should self-isolate and schedule an appointment with the University Health Center by calling 706-542-1162 (Monday-Friday, 8 a.m.-5 p.m.). Please DO NOT walk-in. For emergencies and after-hours care, see https://www.uhs.uga.edu/info/emergencies.
What do I do if I am notified that I have been exposed?
Students who learn they have been directly exposed to COVID-19 but are not showing symptoms should self-quarantine for 14 days consistent with Department of Public Health (DPH) and Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) guidelines. Please correspond with your instructor via email, with a cc: to Student Care & Outreach at sco@uga.edu, to coordinate continuing your coursework while self-quarantined. If you develop symptoms, you should contact the University Health Center to make an appointment to be tested. You should continue to monitor your symptoms daily on DawgCheck.
16

How do I get a test? Students who are demonstrating symptoms of COVID-19 should call the University Health Center. UHC is offering testing by appointment for students; appointments may be booked by calling 706-542-1162. What do I do if I test positive? Any student with a positive COVID-19 test is required to report the test in DawgCheck and should self-isolate immediately. Students should not attend classes in-person until the isolation period is completed. Once you report the positive test through DawgCheck, UGA Student Care and Outreach will follow up with you.
17

