BIOL2103H
Concepts in Biology-Honors

Overview Life on our planet is inextricably tied to soil. Soil sustains production of most of our food. Carbon farming in soil may be an answer for lowering dangerous greenhouse gases and producing more food. In this course, we will use the theme of soil to explore concepts in biology while also considering questions of social responsibility, social justice, and civic life through service learning.

Goals ·
·
· ·

Develop foundational knowledge regarding biochemistry and cycling of nutrients, pathogenic organisms and their effect on human health, and transmission of genetic information. Evaluate new scientific findings and how the Internet, media, and businesses may dramatize and misrepresent those findings. Identify, innovate, and implement a public outreach strategy. Communicate to influence personal and public opinion and policies with a strong commitment to a factual knowledge base.

Spring 2021 TR 2:20-3:35 in room 345 SLC
Instructor: Jill Beyette Email: jill.beyette@uga.edu Office: 4506 Miller Plant Sciences Office Hours Zoom link: https://zoom.us/j/98929207066
TA Jose Pavez Email: josemanuel.pavez@uga.edu
Materials Readings for the course will be posted on eLC and will consist of
· Interactive Google slides · Background content in a free
open-source textbook (Openstax) · Scientific Articles (pdfs)
Service Learning Opportunities · To be announced

Requirements As part of this course, we will participate in citizen science and service learning opportunities. Because of the conditions of the pandemic, these may have a different structure than in semesters past. A portion of your grade in this course will come from these citizen science and outreach opportunities.

Evaluation The course is structured with a series of online quizzes, case studies, tests, and reflective blogging, plus one outreach opportunity. Grades will be assigned based on the University's plus-minus system.
Online Quizzes (10%): eLC quizzes will be used to assess comprehension of readings and collect survey data.
Blog Posts (15%): Reflections of work conducted to describe, examine, and articulate what was learned and how it fits into the bigger picture. There will be unique activities to incorporate creative multimedia and traditional forms of reflection.
Case Study Assignments (30%): Each unit will include multiple case studies that examine real world implications of biology content. Students can collaborate on these in class, with some submitted as a group and others submitted individually.
Tests (40%): Each unit will include a test to provide feedback regarding learning, ability to synthesize material, and progress in making connections both among course content and between science and civic issues. These tests are open notes with access to all resources on computers including the internet. You many use copies of your case studies as preparation for many of the test questions, but you cannot use other students in the class as resources during the tests.
Service Learning Outreach (5%): Students will work as a class to develop, plan, and implement a water quality outreach opportunity to help inform the community about antibiotic resistance or watershed cleanup.
Unit Topics Detailed, day-to-day schedule of readings, class topics, and assignments are on our course eLC Checklist.
1. Water, Bacteria, and Antibiotics 2. Global Cycling 3. Genetics
University Honor Code and Academic Honesty Policy As a University of Georgia student, you have agreed to abide by the University's academic honesty policy, "A Culture of Honesty," and the Student Honor Code. All academic work must meet the standards described in "A Culture of Honesty" found at: https://honesty.uga.edu/Academic-Honesty-Policy/ . Lack of knowledge of the academic honesty policy is not a reasonable explanation for a violation. Questions related to course assignments and the academic honesty policy should be directed to the instructor.
Students with Disabilities Students with disabilities who require reasonable accommodations to participate in course activities or meet course requirements should contact the instructor during regular office hours or by appointment. If you plan to request accommodations for a disability, please register with the Disability Resource Center. They can be reached by visiting Clark Howell Hall, calling 706-542-8719 (voice) or 706-542-8778 (TTY), or by visiting https://drc.uga.edu .
General Disclaimer The course syllabus is a general plan for the course. In particular, this semester new plans will be developed and implemented throughout the semester. We will be announcing new developments and changes in class, through email, and on the announcements page of our course eLC. Please keep up-to-date by reading these resources frequently. We will also be posting updates to the syllabus frequently.

Coronavirus Information for Students
Face Coverings As a reminder, the University of Georgia--along with all University System of Georgia (USG) institutions--requires all faculty, staff, students, and visitors to wear an appropriate face covering while inside campus facilities/buildings where six feet social distancing may not always be possible. This includes our classroom in room 345 SLC. Anyone not using a face covering when required will be asked to wear one or must leave the area. Reasonable accommodations may be made for those who are unable to wear a face covering for documented health reasons. Students seeking an accommodation related to face coverings should contact Disability Services at https://drc.uga.edu/.
DawgCheck Please perform a quick symptom check each weekday on DawgCheck--on the UGA app or website--whether you feel sick or not. It will help health providers monitor the health situation on campus: https://dawgcheck.uga.edu/
What do I do if I have symptoms? Students showing symptoms should self-isolate and schedule an appointment with the University Health Center by calling 706-542-1162 (Monday-Friday, 8 a.m.-5 p.m.). Please DO NOT walk-in. For emergencies and after-hours care, see https://www.uhs.uga.edu/info/emergencies.
What do I do if I test positive? Any student with a positive COVID-19 test is required to report the test in DawgCheck and should self-isolate immediately. Students should not attend classes in-person until the isolation period is completed. Once you report the positive test through DawgCheck, UGA Student Care and Outreach will follow up with you.
What do I do if I am notified that I have been exposed? Revised Guidelines for COVID-19 Quarantine Period Effective Jan. 4, 2021, students who learn they have been directly exposed to COVID-19 but are not showing symptoms should self-quarantine for 10 days (consistent with updated Department of Public Health (DPH) and Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) guidelines). Those quarantining for 10 days must have been symptom-free throughout the monitoring period. Please correspond with your instructor via email, with a cc: to Student Care & Outreach at sco@uga.edu, to coordinate continuing your coursework while self-quarantined.
We strongly encourage students to voluntarily take a COVID-19 test within 48 hours of the end of the 10-day quarantine period (test to be administered between days 8 and 10). Students may obtain these tests at Legion Field (https://clia.vetview.vet.uga.edu/) or at the University Health Center by calling 706-542-1162 (Monday-Friday, 8 a.m.-5 p.m.). Please DO NOT walk-in the University Health Center without an appointment. For emergencies and after-hours care, see https://www.uhs.uga.edu/info/emergencies
If the test is negative, the individual may return to campus, but MUST continue to closely monitor for any new COVID-19 symptoms through 14 days. DawgCheck is the best method for monitoring these symptoms. If new symptoms occur, the individual must not come to campus and must seek further testing/evaluation.
If the test is positive at the end of the 10-day period, the individual must begin a 10-day isolation period from the date of the test.
How do I participate in surveillance testing if I have NO symptoms? We strongly encourage you to take advantage of the expanded surveillance testing that is being offered from January 4 - 22: up to 1,500 free tests per day at Legion Field and pop-up locations. Testing at Legion Field can be scheduled at https://clia.vetview.vet.uga.edu/. Walk-up appointments can usually be accommodated at Legion Field, and pop-up saliva testing does not require pre-registration. For planning purposes, precise sites and schedules for the pop-up clinics are published on the UHC's website and its social media as they are secured: https://www.uhs.uga.edu/healthtopics/covid-surveillance-testing.

