Principles of Biology II (Honors) - BIOL 2108H Fall 2017

PROFESSORS:
Dr. Brian Binder Marine Sciences Bldg rm. 290A 706-542-6408 bbinder@uga.edu
Dr. Brian Hopkinson Marine Sciences Bldg rm. 102B 706-542-7880 bmhopkin@uga.edu
TEACHING ASSISTANT:
tba tba tba

Office Hours: Wed 10:00 -11:00 AM Thurs 3:30 - 4:30 PM or by appointment (please email or call)
Office Hours: Wed 3:00 - 4:00 PM Thurs 3:30 - 4:30 PM or by appointment (please email or call)
Office Hours: tba or by appointment (please email)

7/25/17

AIMS OF THE COURSE
This course aims to cover three "big ideas" around which organismal biology revolves - (1) evolution underlies the unity and diversity of life, (2) organisms sense and interact with the environment and with other organisms, forming ecosystems, and (3) biological systems maintain a stable internal environment. Just as important, we aim to provide you with a framework and some of the intellectual tools with which scientists try to make sense of the living world. Obviously we will only be able to cover a tiny proportion of what we know about organismal biology. There is even more that we do not know. Discoveries come every day, and you will need to be able to evaluate new information throughout your life. The goal, then, is for you to develop lifelong analytical and critical thinking skills that will enable you to continue your learning about biological systems beyond this course.

CLASS MEETINGS Tues, Thurs 9:30 - 10:45

Science Learning Center

rm. 345

REQUIRED COURSE MATERIAL  Text: Campbell BIOLOGY 11th edition  Other readings, as assigned (available on eLC)  A "Top Hat" license is required (see Class Participation, next page)  A SimBio Subscription is required (see In-Class Projects, next page)

COURSE CO-REQUISITE BIOL 2108L Principles of Biology II Laboratory (Honors)

BIOL 2108H Fall 2017

1 / 3

GRADING

Exams = 80% of course grade

Exams may cover material from lectures, assigned readings, and in-class exercises. Exam dates are listed on the class schedule.

Exams 1, 2, 3

16% each

Final Exam (cumulative)

32%

In-Class Projects =

15% of course grade

Two group projects over the course of the semester (see details below)

Class Participation = 5% of course grade This includes ~4 paper discussions as well as general participation (see details below)

Letter-Grades. The following is a general guide for grade assignment in this course. The exact correspondence between calculated numeric grades and assigned letter-grades is at the discretion of the course professors. Please be advised that it is rarely necessary to curve grades in BIOL 2108H.

100 - 93.00 A 92.99 - 90.00 A-

89.99 - 87.00 B+ 86.99 - 83.00 B 82.99 - 80.00 B-

79.99 - 77.00 C+ 76.99 - 73.00 C 72.99 - 70.00 C-

69.99 - 60.00 D < 60.00 F

IN-CLASS PROJECTS
There will be two group projects over the course of the semester (see course schedule). These are designed to (i) give you a deeper understanding of the topic at hand, (ii) help you develop and exercise critical thinking skills, (iii) expand your writing skills. Projects will involve 2 days of in-class work, and a project report (one per group). In addition, preparatory reading may be assigned. Details will be forthcoming. Project grades will be based on the group project report, the due date/time for which is listed on the class schedule. Projects reports will not be accepted after the stated due date/time. No make-ups will be available for these projects.
A SimBio virtual laboratory license is required for project #2 (Oct 12 & 17). All students must purchase a SimBio license ($6) for this project. More information will be provided in the near future.

CLASS PARTICIPATION
In-class exercises will use the Top Hat student response system. Top Hat works with any web-enabled device (laptop, smartphone, tablet, etc.), or with text-capable phones. Students must purchase a Top Hat subscription ($18 for a semester). We will start using the system in class on Tuesday 8/22/17. Subscriptions may be purchased at www.tophat.com (click sign-up button; join code for this course = 707263). As a convenience, you should also receive an email from Top Hat inviting you to join. More information can be found at http://www.ctl.uga.edu/top-hat/students.
In-class exercises will include scheduled paper discussions (see class schedule) as well as unannounced short quizzes, surveys, one-minute papers, etc., most of which will be administered via Top Hat. Details about paper discussions will be forthcoming. Grading will be based on a combination of participation and answer content. Full participation credit will be awarded to students with 80% or more of the total possible participation points over the course of the semester. Below this 80% threshold, the credit awarded will equal the % credit earned. No make-ups will be available for inclass exercises.

BIOL 2108H Fall 2017

2 / 3

ON-LINE RESOURCES
Updated class schedule and readings, project and exercise information, lecture notes (when available), exam grades, and administrative information will be posted on eLC (https://uga.view.usg.edu/).
MAKE-UP POLICIES
Make-up exams will be offered only in cases of serious medical or other personal emergencies that prevent a student from taking the regularly scheduled exam. Any student who finds him/herself in this situation should contact Dr. Binder or Dr. Hopkinson before the regularly scheduled exam if at all possible, and in any case not more than 24 h after the exam. Documentation from a health care provider (in the case of illness), or other sources as appropriate, will be required. The decision to offer a make-up exam is at the sole discretion of the course Professors.
No make-ups will be available for in-class projects or exercises.
ACADEMIC HONESTY
As a University of Georgia student, you have agreed to abide by the University' s academic honesty policy, "A Culture of Honesty," and the Student Honor Code. All academic work must meet the standards described in "A Culture of Honesty" found at: https://ovpi.uga.edu/academic-honesty/academic-honesty-policy. Lack of knowledge of the academic honesty policy is not a reasonable explanation for a violation. Questions related to course assignments and the academic honesty policy should be directed to the course instructors.
Honesty is fundamental to everything we do at the University: all meaningful learning and research is predicated on academic honesty. Academic dishonesty harms and degrades your classmates and teachers, and it ultimately harms and degrades you. If you have any questions regarding what constitutes honest or dishonest behavior, Dr. Binder, Dr. Hopkinson, and your TA stand ready to discuss these issues with you - please feel free to contact any of us.
Sharing the daily Top Hat attendance code or other Top Hat details with a student who is not in the classroom is explicitly defined as a violation of the honor code.
PERSONAL ELECTRONIC DEVICES
Cell phones should be silenced during class periods. Please be considerate of your fellow classmates and your instructor, and don't engage in phone conversations or texting (beyond Top Hat participation) during class.
Laptops are currently permitted during lectures, but their use should be restricted to appropriate classrelated activities (e.g. note-taking, Top Hat). Laptop use in the classroom is a privilege, not a right, and this privilege may be revoked if it is abused.
During exams, the use of cell phones, laptops, and all other personal electronic devices is expressly prohibited.
SYLLABUS DISCLAIMER
This course syllabus is a general plan for the course; deviations announced to the class by the instructor may be necessary.
Updated lecture schedules and other changes will be announced in class and posted on eLC as necessary. Information posted on eLC takes precedence over all previous information.

BIOL 2108H Fall 2017

3 / 3

