BIOL2108H, Principles of Biology II for Honors Students, Fall 2020

Days Time Location

Tuesday & Thursday 12:45 - 2:00 pm CHEM 403 (West auditorium)

This course will be taught in person - when in the class room, please wear face coverings and follow the distanced-seating rules.

Instructors

Megan Peterson, PhD Assistant Professor 3609 Miller Plant Sciences Megan.Peterson2@uga.edu

Wolfgang Lukowitz, PhD Associate Professor 4609 Miller Plant Sciences lukowitz@uga.edu

Teaching Assistant

Hannah Choi PhD candidate 162 Marine Sciences hannahlychoi@uga.edu

Office hours
Prerequisites Aims

MP: Thursdays 10:30 - 12:00, 3609 Miller Plant Sciences 3609 and by appointment WL: On zoom, by appointment - please email, I will make time for you! HC: On zoom, Wednesdays 3:00 - 4:30 BIOL 1107 or BIOL2107H

Our class aims to introduce some of the big-picture, fundamental concepts surrounding  structure/function relationships, and  the flow of energy and matter through biological systems. We will emphasize connections across scales, from molecules to cells to the biosphere.

One of our most important goals is to get you to "think like a scientist" by considering not just what we know, but how we know it. Thus, learning how to extract, organize, analyze and evaluate information found online, in popular media, peer-reviewed literature, or statistics and graphs is a central theme of the course. We hope that such skills can then not only be applied to other scientific pursuits but also in many other parts of your lives.

The class is divided into five units:

Dates

Theme

1 Jan 14 - Feb 2 Mount St. Helens: disturbance, recovery, and the biological

Exam 1: Feb 4 importance of nitrogen

2 Feb 9 -Feb 18

Sonoran Desert plants: how trade-offs shape diversity

3 Feb 23 - March 2 Sea otters & kelp forests: how energy structures communities

Exam 2: March 4

4 Mar 9 - Mar 30 Signals & senses: different perspectives on what's going on in

Exam 3: April 1 the environment

5 Apr 6 - Apr 27 Diabetes in America: how our body organizes fuel distribution

Exam 4: Apr 29 & what can go wrong

Instructor MP
MP MP
WL
WL

Detailed schedules will be distributed for each unit separately. Obviously, our material can only cover a tiny portion of biology - so, think about this course as a place where you can develop your analytical and critical thinking skills while learning more about what types of biology interest you most. Let this be a jumping off point!

Learning resources

eLC: This will be our primary way to distribute information, including slides or worksheets used in class, readings, assignments, quizzes, links. All material relevant for the exams will be placed there. Please check eLC frequently or consider to set your eLC preferences to automatically receive your updates as text messages.

Textbook: This course does not require a textbook. We will occasionally assign readings taken from OpenStax Biology, a free online publication. Open Stacks Biology may also be a valuable secondary resource for you, a place where you can look up background information or reinforce material covered in class. You can access Open Stacks Biology through your browser, or download a .pdf version here: OpenStax Biology Textbook (print copies are also available, for example at Amazon). Please note that Open Stacks Biology contains a lot of material that we won't cover, so we do NOT recommend reading it "cover to cover".

SimBio: This course includes three SimBio labs that will be assigned over the course of the semester. The total cost of these materials will be $18. Instructions will be provided with each unit.

Technology: You will need a smart phone, tablet, or laptop with you in class for accessing information on eLC and answering TopHat questions. Please respect yourself and your classmates by using your technology to focus on course material only. If you need any help getting suitable technology, please let us know so we can help!

Assessment & grading

Throughout the semester, you'll collect points for your performance in the exams as well as in-class and

taker-home assignments. You can earn a total of 650 points - briefly:

Exams:

450 points (4 exams with 150 points each, lowest score dropped)

Activities:

200 points (240 points allocated, such that you can miss some activities)

Exams: The four exams will cover material discussed in the preceding unit or units (there will be no cumulative final), and each exam is allocated 150 points. We will drop the exam with your lowest score and count the remaining three, such you can earn up to 450 points for your exams.

Make-up exams: Should a medical emergency or other pressing obligation prevent you from participating an exam, you will have the opportunity of completing a make-up exam. In case of predictable conflicts, such as a scientific meeting or a UGA-sponsored field trip, please make sure to obtain written consent by the instructors in advance of the exam you want to miss (email is fine). In case of a medical emergency, please provide the instructors with written documentation by the physician's office or a qualified health care professional. Please contact the teaching assistant about scheduling a make-up exam.

Participation and assignments: Each instructor will allocate 120 points to various class assignments (such as work-sheets, problem sets or similar activities) and short pre-class reading quizzes. How many points are allocated to these activities will be detailed in the schedule for each unit. We will tally all participation and assignment points on eLC, so you can monitor your standing. No more than 200 participation and assignment points will count toward your final grade, although we will allocate a total of 240 points - thus, you will not be penalized for skipping or missing some of the activities.

Final grades: Our default grade scale is below - if the class average is unusually low, we may adjust this

scale ("grade on a curve") to bring the final grades closer to the long-term average for the class. We will

only curve the grades "upward".

Grade

Points

A

>601 (>93%)

C+

516-498 (~79-77%)

A-

600-582 (~92-90%)

C

497-452 (~76-70%)

B+

581-563 (~89-87%)

D

451-387 (~69-60%)

B

562-537 (~86-83%)

F

<386 (~<60%)

B-

536-517 (~82-80%)

Academic Honesty and the Honor Code
As a University of Georgia student, you have agreed to abide by the University's academic honesty policy and the Student Honor Code. All academic work must meet the standards described in "A Culture of Honesty". Academic work includes, but is not limited to, course assignments, reading quizzes, case studies, exams, in-class questions, and course evaluations (please feel contact the instructors with any questions about this). Some examples of code violations you should avoid include:  Sharing academic work online (Course Hero, Koofers, etc.), on electronic media, or in a physical space.  Copying someone else's academic work.  Completing academic work for someone else.  Looking at another person's exam while taking an exam.
Disability Accommodations
Reasonable accommodations are available for students who have a disability. The Disability Resource Center in the Division of Student Affairs (https://drc.uga.edu/; note that his website doesn't work on Chrome; 114 Clark Howell Hall; 706-542-8719 voice; 706-542-7719 fax; 706-542-8778 tty) coordinates accommodations and services for students with disabilities. Please notify the instructors of any accommodations needed for the course.
Mental Health and Wellness Resources
If you or someone you know needs assistance, you are encouraged to contact Student Care and Outreach in the Division of Student Affairs at 706-542-7774 or visit https://sco.uga.edu. They will help you navigate any difficult circumstances you may be facing by connecting you with the appropriate resources or services. UGA offers a number of resources for students seeking mental health services (https://www.uhs.uga.edu/bewelluga/bewelluga) or crisis support (https://www.uhs.uga.edu/info/emergencies). If you need help managing stress anxiety, relationships, etc., please visit BeWellUGA (https://www.uhs.uga.edu/bewelluga/bewelluga) for a list of FREE workshops, classes, mentoring, and health coaching led by licensed clinicians and health educators in the University Health Center. Additional resources can be accessed through the UGA App.
Coronavirus information
Face Coverings: Effective July 15, 2020, the University of Georgia--along with all University System of Georgia (USG) institutions--requires all faculty, staff, students and visitors to wear an appropriate face covering while inside campus facilities/buildings where six feet social distancing may not always be possible. Face covering use is in addition to and is not a substitute for social distancing. Anyone not

using a face covering when required will be asked to wear one or must leave the area. Reasonable accommodations may be made for those who are unable to wear a face covering for documented health reasons. Students seeking an accommodation related to face coverings should contact Disability Services at https://drc.uga.edu/.
DawgCheck: Please perform a quick symptom check each weekday on DawgCheck--on the UGA app or website--whether you feel sick or not. It will help health providers monitor the health situation on campus: https://dawgcheck.uga.edu/
What do I do if I have symptoms? Students showing symptoms should self-isolate and schedule an appointment with the University Health Center by calling 706-542-1162 (Monday-Friday, 8 a.m.-5 p.m.). Please DO NOT walk-in. For emergencies and after-hours care, see https://www.uhs.uga.edu/info/emergencies.
What do I do if I am notified that I have been exposed? Students who learn they have been directly exposed to COVID-19 but are not showing symptoms should self-quarantine for 14 days consistent with Department of Public Health (DPH) and Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) guidelines. Please correspond with your instructors via email, with a cc: to Student Care & Outreach at sco@uga.edu, to coordinate continuing your coursework while self-quarantined. If you develop symptoms, you should contact the University Health Center to make an appointment to be tested. You should continue to monitor your symptoms daily on DawgCheck.
How do I get a test? Students who are demonstrating symptoms of COVID-19 should call the University Health Center. UHC is offering testing by appointment for students; appointments may be booked by calling 706-542-1162. UGA will also be recruiting asymptomatic students to participate in surveillance tests. Students living in residence halls, Greek housing and off-campus apartment complexes are encouraged to participate.
What do I do if I test positive? Any student with a positive COVID-19 test is required to report the test in DawgCheck and should self-isolate immediately. Students should not attend classes in-person until the isolation period is completed. Once you report the positive test through DawgCheck, UGA Student Care and Outreach will follow up with you. Students should not attend classes in-person until the isolation period is completed. Once you report the positive test through DawgCheck, UGA Student Care and Outreach will follow up with you.
The course syllabus is a general plan for the course; deviations announced to the class by the instructors may be necessary.

