SYLLABUS GENE (BIOL) 3000

1) FACULTY

Meets Tuesday/Thursdays 11:00 a.m. - 12:15 p.m. C127 Davison Life Sciences Complex

Dr. Daniel Promislow C214 Davison Life Sciences promislow@uga.edu Office hours: By appointment

Dr. David Moeller B412 Davison Life Sciences dmoeller@uga.edu Office hours: By appointment

2) TEACHING ASSISTANTS

Ms. Christina Zakas C328 Davison Life Sciences zakas1@uga.edu

Mr. Evan Staton 4610 Miller Plant Sciences statonse@uga.edu

3) COURSE DESCRIPTION AND PREREQUISITES An introduction to biological evolution, from the level of genes to species. The prerequisite for this course is BIOL 1108 or its equivalent. You should have a firm grasp of Mendelian genetics and understand basic concepts of molecular genetics and biochemistry. Since evolutionary biology has a substantial mathematical component, you should feel comfortable with algebra.

4) COURSE OBJECTIVES AND EXPECTED LEARNING OUTCOMES Evolution is the major organizing principle of all the life sciences. The field of evolutionary biology is an active one, with applications in agriculture, medicine, conservation, computer science, and industry. Darwin's description of evolution by natural selection is one of the key intellectual achievements of humanity and all educated people should understand its basic concepts. The course goals are: to introduce you to the principles of evolutionary biology, including population genetics and macroevolution; to demonstrate the application of evolution to other fields through the use of case studies; to help you understand the mathematical underpinnings of evolution through practice; to have you understand the four basic evolutionary forces; and, to appreciate the processes that led to the generation of earth's biodiversity.

5) REQUIRED BOOKS (In bookstore under GENE 3000) Freeman, S. and J.C. Herron 2007. Evolutionary Analysis, 4th Edition. Prentice Hall.

6) ECOMMONS The course website is at http://elc.uga.edu/. Go to GENE 3000 (Promislow, Moeller). You will find the lecture schedule and syllabus, lecture notes, sample exams, answer keys, grades and an electronic bulletin board on the website. After drop/add ends, all students will be required to take an online quiz at the eCommons site that will cover this syllabus. Students who do not complete the quiz will be withdrawn from the class.

7) DISCUSSION SECTIONS

This is a 4 credit course and you are required to attend a weekly one hour section in addition to the

lectures. Attendance will be taken at each discussion section. There will be several time slots

available at different times of the day. Each section will be led by a teaching assistant. These

sections provide an opportunity for you to ask questions, solve problems and practice exam skills.

You can go to as many as you want, but you must attend 1 per week. Sections begin the week of Aug.

24 and will not meet the week of Thanksgiving break.

Times and Places

Monday

1:25 - 2:15 C120 Life Sciences

Christina

Monday

3:35 - 4:25 C120 Life Sciences

Evan

Monday

4:40 - 5:30 C130 Life Sciences

Evan

Wednesday 9:05 - 9:55 C120 Life Sciences

Evan

Thursday 2:00 - 3:00 1102 Miller Plant Sciences Christina

Thursday 3:30 - 4:30 1102 Miller Plant Sciences Christina

1

8) EXAMS We will give 4 exams that will give you the opportunity to demonstrate your understanding of the course material, including the lectures, and readings from the textbook. Our exams are a combination of short answer, problem solving, and essay, and emphasize a conceptual understanding of the course material - not rote memorization. When we grade the exams, we are looking for evidence that you have an understanding of the material. Forming a small study group will help you review the course material and study the subject actively. We do not use the 90/80/70/65 scale, but exams are generously curved. We will give you some rough guidance as to the approximate letter grade of your exam, although your final grade is determined only at the end of the semester based on the overall distribution of grades in the class.
9) GRADING POLICY 25% of final grade: exam 1 25% of final grade: exam 2 25% of final grade: exam 3 25% of final grade: final
This course is graded on a generous curve. Therefore, your final course grade is determined based on the final distribution of all grades in the class, not on any specific grade cut-off. For example, getting above an 89.45 average does not guarantee an `A-' grade. We assign plus-minus grades using the following guidelines: `A:' achievement that is outstanding and well above the level necessary to meet course requirements; `B:' achievement that is above the level necessary to meet course requirements; `C:' achievement that meets the basic course requirements; `D:' achievement that is worthy of credit even though it does not fully meet the basic course requirements; `F:' achievement that fails to satisfy the basic course requirements. The final grade distribution in last year's class, including +'s and -`s, was: `A:' 16%; `B:' 47%; `C:' 32%; `D:' 4%; `F:' 1%. Students who scored the class average received a C+. Of course, past performance is no guarantee of future results and the distribution of grades this semester may be different from past years.
10) MAKEUP POLICY No makeup exams will be given. If you have a legitimate excuse for absence, your final grade will be calculated based on the remaining grades. The faculty has the ultimate discretion as to whether or not you have a legitimate excuse. You must document your excuse in writing to the faculty (not a TA) within 1 week of the date of the missed exam (e.g., a detailed note from a physician - not a generic note from the Health Center). You may find it helpful to contact the Office of Student Affairs (201 Holmes-Hunter Academic Building) for assistance in documenting your absence. Without an acceptable written excuse, your grade on a missed exam will be zero.
11) REGRADE POLICY All exams are graded anonymously by the faculty and TA's. We try to grade as quickly and fairly as possible. However, if you believe that a question was graded incorrectly and want it regraded, please submit a signed, written request to the professor within 1 week of receiving the graded exam. The request should detail how you believe the question was graded incorrectly. No exams completed in pencil will be regraded. The professor will regrade the question. Please note: in grading exams, we determine acceptable answers by looking at how the class as a whole answered a question. In this way we can fairly decide what we will accept as a correct answer. Since we have no other exams to compare to in a regrade, the question will be regraded using the faculty member's ideal answer as the standard. Since it is possible that the new grade for a question will be lower than the original grade, please consider your requests for regrades carefully. This policy is meant to make regrades as fair as possible to the entire class: it should not deter you from discussing your exam with the TA's or the faculty.
12) FACULTY AND COURSE EVALUATIONS Student evaluations of the course and faculty will be performed online rather than in class. Online evaluations should provide you more time to give us thoughtful feedback. The faculty will announce in class the window of time when online evaluations are available. Students will be able
2

to access the evaluation form at http://eval.franklin.uga.edu/. Although you will need to login with your UGA MyID, the system is anonymous: your responses are not in any way linked to your identification. 13) DISABILITIES AND LANGUAGE PROBLEMS We are committed to full inclusion of all students. Students who, by nature of a documented disability, require academic accommodations should contact Dr. Promislow as soon as possible. Students should speak with Disability Services (542-8719) to discuss the process for requesting accommodations. Since our exams require lengthy essays, if you do not speak English fluently and feel that you require additional time for exams, see Dr. Promislow. 14) ACADEMIC HONESTY All academic work must meet the standards contained in "A Culture of Honesty." Students are responsible for informing themselves about those standards before performing any academic work. 15) COURTESIES You are expected to be at lecture on time and should not leave before the lecture ends. If you are late, do not let the door to the lecture hall slam shut - it is loud and distracting. You may feel anonymous in a large lecture hall, but you would be amazed at how much the instructor can see and hear, even those doing crossword puzzles in the back. Please turn off cell phones and silence pagers during class. Although the Davison Building has wireless capabilities, students may not use laptops during lecture except for course-related use. 16) OFFICE HOURS The faculty will have office hours by appointment. 17) H1N1 FLU If you are feeling sick, and in particular, if you experience flu-like symptoms (fever, cough, sore throat, runny or stuffy nose, body aches, headache, chills and fatigue), PLEASE DO NOT COME TO CAMPUS. 18) DISCLAIMER The course syllabus is a general plan for the course; deviations announced to the class by the instructors may be necessary.
3

