1
CELLULAR BIOLOGY 3000: Comparative Vertebrate Anatomy Spring 2015
Course Syllabus (Lecture)
This syllabus and the associated schedule provide a general plan for the course. Deviations may be necessary and will be announced to the class.
Class Meeting Time: Tuesday-­-Thursday 2:00PM - 3:15PM Class Location: Biological Sciences, Room 404B
INSTRUCTOR:
Dr. Vanessa L. Williams Office: Room 629 Biological Sciences Building Office hours: By appointment; please send email to set up appointment. In all correspondences, please include your class, class time, and lab section. (Note: An appointment is not scheduled until you have received a confirmation from me.) Phone: 706-­-542-­-5866 E-­-mail: vwilliam@uga.edu
LAB COORDINATOR: Ms. Angela Holliday Office: G14 Graduate School Building Office hours: By appointment Phone: 706-­-542-­-3322 E-­-mail: abriley@uga.edu
TEXTBOOKS and MATERIALS
Required: 1. Textbook: Gray's Anatomy for Students, Drake, Vogel, and Mitchell, Elsevier, 3rd Edition.
2. Lab Manual: Mammalian Anatomy: The Cat. Sebastiani and Fishbeck, Morton Publishing Company, ISBN: 978-­-0895826831
3. Classroom Response System: Top Hat - please follow the instructions for registering for a TopHAt account that are included in the email inviting you to TopHat. Please enroll from a computer. (TopHat is provided free-­-of-­-charge to students this year.)
The syllabus is a general plan for the course. The instructor may deviate from the syllabus as necessary. CBIO 3000 Spring 2015 Syllabus.docx; 1/16/15

2
While students may use a laptop, tablet, or web-­-enabled smartphone for submitting answers. The use of laptops is discouraged due to the bandwidth available in the classrooms.
If you insist on using the TopHat app, you do so at your own risk. I will not be responsible for assigning credit for unsuccessful submissions when using the app. Please note that your gradebook will not be accessible when using these devices. You must log in from a browser to view your gradebook.
The most efficient method to submit answers is using short message service (SMS) submissions. You can submit answers in class using any phone by sending a message to the course's texting number. This number will be provided at the test-­-run and it will be displayed on the right side of the screen during each TopHat activity.
You should always receive a confirmation message that the submission was received. If you do not receive a confirmation, please check the number. It is highly recommended that you retain a record of your SMS submissions and do not delete your messages from your phone. I will not be responsible for assigning credit for submissions sent to the wrong course texting number.
If you have any trouble with registration or require assistance with anything Top Hat-­-related you can email support@tophat.com or click the Support button from your Top Hat account.
Additional resources available: 1. Gray's Anatomy for Students Flash Cards
DESCRIPTION and LEARNING OBJECTIVES
Human Anatomy and Physiology is a two-­-semester course sequence offering a comprehensive study of the basic structures and functions of the organ systems of the human body. Both courses emphasize the interrelationship and integration of human anatomy and human physiology on the molecular, cellular, and organ system levels. The first semester (Anatomy and Physiology I) topics include the integumentary, osseous, muscular, nervous and sensory systems. The goal of this course is to introduce you to the basic foundational knowledge of human anatomy and physiology that is necessary for you to succeed in your chosen field in the health sciences. Memorization of factual knowledge is a necessary prerequisite, but to do well you will also have to master higher-­-level learning skills such as application, analysis, synthesis, and evaluation. These skills are life-­-long learning skills that will serve you beyond this class, in other college courses, and in your professional career.
You will encounter a vast amount of new vocabulary and concepts in this course. Therefore, waiting until 5 nights before the exam to study the material will likely lead to an unsuccessful semester in the course. The best strategy for success is to interact with
The syllabus is a general plan for the course. The instructor may deviate from the syllabus as necessary. CBIO 3000 Spring 2015 Syllabus.docx; 1/16/15

3
the material each day. A general rule of thumb is that you will need to study a minimum of 2-­-3 hours for each hour of lecture.
EDUCATIONAL OBJECTIVES
How do you know if you have mastered a concept? You have mastered the course material if you can analyze, synthesize and evaluate a topic; these are considered higher-­-order thinking skills. Bloom's Taxonomy of Learning Outcomes (see http://education.calumet.purdue.edu/vockell/edpsybook/bloom/bloom%27s_taxonom y.htm for more details) describes six different cognitive levels that will be useful in this course. They are listed briefly below:
Knowledge -­- the ability to recall or state information.
Comprehension -­- the ability to give meaning to information.
Application -­- the ability to use knowledge or principles in new or real-­-life situations.
Analysis -­- the ability to break down complex information into simpler parts and to understand the relationships among the parts.
Synthesis -­- the act of creating something that did not exist before by integrating information that had been learned at lower levels of the hierarchy.
Evaluation -­- the ability to make judgments based on previous levels of learning to compare a product of some kind against a designated standard.
eLC (eLearning Commons): eLC (http://elc.uga.edu) is a web-­-based course
management system used for CBIO 3000. Use your myID and password to access eLC. Once you log in, choose CBIO 3000 from your courses listed to access information about the course (e.g. course syllabus). Grades and other pertinent information will be available on eLC.
BIOSCIENCE LEARNING CENTER (BLC): The Bioscience Learning Center (BLC) is
located in Room 406 of the Biological Sciences Building. It is a computer lab (with both Mac and PC) for use by students enrolled in courses at UGA. Consult the BLC website (http://www.biosciences.uga.edu/blc/blc_main.html) for a complete list of resources.
The syllabus is a general plan for the course. The instructor may deviate from the syllabus as necessary. CBIO 3000 Spring 2015 Syllabus.docx; 1/16/15

4
LECTURES. You are expected to attend all lectures. Tardiness to class will likely result
in you forfeiting your opportunity to take any quiz that is given that day. If you choose to skip a class, it is your responsibility to contact a classmate to obtain all missed information and class notes. You are responsible for all class material and you are responsible for the assigned material in the text that is relevant for topics covered in class. Read the assigned pages in the text before class. After lecture reread in detail the text sections directly related to lecture, taking note of terms and concepts that are unfamiliar to you and use this information to complement your class notes.
LABORATORY. Your laboratory class meets in Room 322 in the Biological Sciences
Building. You must attend the laboratory section for which you are registered. In addition, the lab will be opened at various times to allow you to complete your cat dissections.
Cell phone usage during your lab session is prohibited!!
CLASS ETIQUETTE. Appropriate classroom etiquette is crucial for an effective
learning experience. Students have a right to a productive and stimulating learning environment. A disruptive student may be subject to disciplinary action under the University's Code of Student Conduct (http://conduct.uga.edu/code_of_conduct/codeofconduct.pdf).
Please be on time for class. Cell phones should be turned off prior to the beginning of each lecture. You are permitted to use electronic devices to take notes during class, not to check Facebook, shop, or participate in other non-­-class related activities.
All cell phones and other electronic devices must be turned off prior to exams. The use of cell phones and other electronic devices is not permitted during exams.
A few minutes late? Please take a seat quietly close to the door without disturbing your classmates. Please do not talk to each other during class unless instructed to do so (disturbance of class mates is considered academic misconduct). If you have any class-­- related questions please ask at any time; I will be happy to clarify.
COMMUNICATION WITH INSTRUCTOR. The most efficient way to contact me is
via email. Emails will usually be answered within 48-­-72 hours Monday through Friday; weekends are excluded.
The syllabus is a general plan for the course. The instructor may deviate from the syllabus as necessary. CBIO 3000 Spring 2015 Syllabus.docx; 1/16/15

5
POLICY ON LETTERS OF RECOMMENDATION. I do not write letters of
recommendation before the semester has been completed. To get a letter of recommendation written, you must have finished the class with at least a B+.
EXAMINATIONS. Exams may be a mix of multiple-­-choice (machine-­-graded) and
constructed response questions. Exam scores will be posted ~1 week after the exam. There will be five lecture exams and one cumulative Final Exam. Only four lecture exam grades will be used to calculate your final grade. The lowest of your five lecture exam scores will be dropped when calculating your final grade.
Ø Lecture exams are administered at the beginning of class. Please, be punctual. Ø A lecture exam may include "multiple choice", "fill in the blanks", "critique",
"sketch", "discuss", "compare and contrast", "calculate", "essay" questions, etc. Ø Lecture exams will cover notes given in class and pertinent information from the
textbook.
Attendance at all exams is required. You must bring at least one #2 pencil and a UGA ID to ALL exams. You are required to provide your own pencils and erasers. I do not provide them. If by chance you do not have a UGA ID present at the exam, you will have 3 days (3 UGA business days) in which you must present your ID to me. Failure to present the ID to me within 3 days will result in a zero for that exam.
There are NO MAKE-­-UP lecture exams or quizzes. Remember that the lowest of your five lecture exam scores will be dropped when calculating your final grade. This policy will accommodate any unforeseen life events that may occur resulting in your absence from an exam.
There will be NO extra credit assignments.
REVIEW OF LECTURE EXAMS
Review of lecture exams will take place during your lab session. You will have only this one opportunity to review your exam.
GRADE APPEALS
Once you review your exam in lab, you must take a minimum of 24 hours before you contact me with any issues related to the exam. These issues should be legitimate in nature, such as incorrect addition of points or disagreement with the answer key (as documented by information in the Saladin textbook). Written re-­-grade requests should be brief but thorough explanations of why a specific question (include the question
The syllabus is a general plan for the course. The instructor may deviate from the syllabus as necessary. CBIO 3000 Spring 2015 Syllabus.docx; 1/16/15

6
number) warrants regarding. Include the page(s) from the textbook that support(s) your claim. Requests must be submitted (via email) within one week of your review of the answer key. Please include your course name, 810/811 number, and your lab session (M1, T1, T2, or W1, etc). My decision is final and binding.

FINAL COURSE GRADE. You can earn a total of 1000 points (100%) this semester:

Possible Points
Grade
LECTURE Five lecture exams (138 pts each) In-­-Class Assessments ** Attendance/Participation**
LAB All assignments (see Lab Syllabus)

% of Final

690 pts 5 pts 5 pts
300 pts 1000 pts

69.0% 0.5% 0.5%
30.0% 100.0%

GRADE A A-­- B+ B B-­-

% POINTS 90-­-100% 88-­-89.99% 86-­-87.99% 80-­-85.99 78-­-79.99%

TOTAL POINTS 900-­-1000 880-­-899.9 860-­-879.9 800-­-859.9 780-­-799.9

GRADE C+ C C-­- D F

% POINTS 76-­-77.99% 70-­-75.99% 68-­-69.99% 60-­-67.99% <60%

TOTAL POINTS 760-­-779.9 700-­-759.9 680-­-699.9 600-­-679.9 <600

**Points for In-­-class assessments/participation and Attendance will be awarded as follows.
For each category: -­-if you obtain 80% of the possible points, you will be awarded 5 points. -­-if you obtain 60-­-79.99% of the possible points, you will be awarded 2.5 points.
v No points will be awarded for obtaining less than 59.99% of the possible points.

***Your lab grade will be calculated as follows:
The syllabus is a general plan for the course. The instructor may deviate from the syllabus as necessary. CBIO 3000 Spring 2015 Syllabus.docx; 1/16/15

7

1.

The lab practical grades will be used to calculate your final lab grade

using the following formula.

Number of points earned X 300 points = Final lab grade (out of 300 points)
Number of points possible

INCOMPLETE. The grade of incomplete may be granted when a student was doing
satisfactory work but, for non-­-academic reasons beyond his/her control, was unable to meet the full requirements of the course. An Incomplete will not ordinarily be given unless the student has completed a substantial part of the course. No more than three semesters (counting summer school as one semester) may be allowed to complete the work in the course, unless an earlier deadline is specified. If an Incomplete is not satisfactorily removed after three semesters (summer school counts as one semester), it will be changed to the grade of "F" by the Registrar.
The grade of incomplete is given to students who for a documented reason were unable to complete the course. Missing the final exam due to an incorrect entry on your calendar, oversleeping, vacation, family wedding, forgetting the test day, etc. do not constitute documented reasons for being unable to complete the course. Incompletes are not given to avoid a failing grade.
STRUGGLING? You should be studying a minimum of 2 hours per lecture hour (in
addition to class and reading) to do well. You are strongly encouraged to form a small study group with a few of your classmates. Nothing reinforces the material better than asking questions and answering the questions of others. Even just quizzing each other on the definition of specific terms will be of great help. If you have done these things and are still struggling, please make an appointment to see me. You may be more efficient by changing your study method. I will be glad to work with you on that. In addition, tutors (and general advice) may be available through the Milledge Academic Center: http://tutor.uga.edu/.

ACADEMIC HONESTY. All academic work must meet the standards contained in "A
Culture of Honesty" (http://www.uga.edu/honesty/ahpd/culture_honesty.htm). You are responsible for informing yourself about those standards before performing any academic work. Students who violate this policy (e.g. look at or copy from exams of others, letting others copy, exchange information on exams before both have taken it) will be reported to the Office of the Vice President for Academic Affairs and are subject to severe disciplinary penalties including the possible failure of the course and/or
The syllabus is a general plan for the course. The instructor may deviate from the syllabus as necessary. CBIO 3000 Spring 2015 Syllabus.docx; 1/16/15

8

dismissal from the University. Policies regarding academic dishonesty will be strictly enforced in both lecture and the lab.
DISABILITIES. Accommodations will be made for students with disabilities. All
students requesting accommodation must receive certification from the UGA office of student support (http://studentsupport.eug.edu/). Testing services are provided for students with disabilities who need specific testing accommodations such as extended testing time, scribe services, low distraction testing environment, Braille test conversion, and the use of assistive technology through the Disability Resource Center (DRC). When necessary, the student may receive accommodations at the Testing Office at the DRC

CBIO3000--SPRING 2015 LECTURE/EXAM/QUIZ SCHEDULE
(subject to revisions)

WEEK of
JAN 6
JAN 9 JAN 20
JAN 27 FEB 3 FEB 10 FEB 17
FEB 24 MAR 3 MAR 9 MAR 16 MAR 24
MAR 24 MAR 31 APR 7
APR 14 APR 21 APR 30

LECTURE TOPIC
INTRODUCTION Back Drop/Add ends Tuesday, January 20th, EXAM 1 (Covers Chapter 2) Thorax Thorax Thorax Lower Limb Tuesday, February 17th, Exam 2 (Covers Chapter 3) Lower Limb Abdomen Abdomen
-­--­--­--­--­--­--­--­--­--­- SPRING BREAK -­--­--­--­--­--­--­--­--­--­- Abdomen Tuesday, March 24th, Exam 3 (Covers Chapters 4 and 6) Head and Neck Head and Neck Head and Neck Tuesday, April 7th, Exam 4 (Covers Chapter 8) Upper Limb Upper Limb Upper Limb FINAL EXAM is scheduled for Thursday, Apr 30th; 3:30-­-6:30pm **The final exam is not comprehensive and therefore will consist of lecture material covered since the 4th exam.

REQUIRED READING
Ch 2
Ch 3 Ch 3 Ch 3 Ch 6
Ch 6 Ch 4 Ch 4
Ch 4
Ch 8 Ch 8 Ch 8
Ch 7 Ch 7 Ch 7

The syllabus is a general plan for the course. The instructor may deviate from the syllabus as necessary. CBIO 3000 Spring 2015 Syllabus.docx; 1/16/15

9
The syllabus is a general plan for the course. The instructor may deviate from the syllabus as necessary. CBIO 3000 Spring 2015 Syllabus.docx; 1/16/15

