Gross Human Anatomy
(aka, CBIO 3010/L)

Course Information Title: Gross Anatomy

Lecture: 404D Biosciences

Lab:

322 Biosciences

Instructor Rob Nichols (rob10367@uga.edu) 621 Biological Sciences Building
Office Hours MW: 1:10-2:30, others by appointment
Laboratory Coordinator Angie Holliday (abriley@uga.edu) School of Social Work Bldg G14 279 Williams Street
Phone 706.542.3322
Academic Director DeLoris Wenzel Hesse (hesse@uga.edu)

General Description and Learning Objectives
Human Anatomy emphasizes the structural anatomy of the human body while developing a comparative approach in the lab with the anatomy of the cat. The primary goal is to provide a solid foundation for those students pursuing careers in the health sciences, such as human and veterinary medicine. This basic knowledge requires your mastery of factual materials, laboratory techniques, and problem-solving skills. Upon successful completion of the course, students will demonstrate knowledge of mammalian anatomy, particularly that of the human, with an understanding of how form determines function.
Students that achieve these goals will be able to: Demonstrate a mastery of anatomical terminology. Recognize, identify, and discuss the structure and function of the various anatomical regions of the human body.
A laboratory component is integral to a full understanding of anatomy. Your laboratory course will provide you with hands-on experience, as opposed to workbook or computer-generated activities that could be done in a non-laboratory setting. It will provide you with a rare opportunity to see and study many of the structures and relationships that will be important to you in the health sciences. Laboratory activities are designed to encourage critical thinking, the understanding of scientific methodology, and the application of scientific principles. Direct participation is expected and required.

As your instructor, I have several long-term goals for you. First, that you will learn to evaluate information and make decisions based upon material you have mastered. Second, that you will learn to find and use resources for answering questions and solving problems. Third, that you will acquire and improve skills in working with others as a member of a team.

Course Prerequisite: BIOL 1107/1107L

This syllabus represents a general plan for the course. Any deviation from the syllabus that may be necessary will be announced in class and will be posted to eLC. (5 Jan 2018)

Gross Human Anatomy

Required Resources
1. Gray's Anatomy for Students, Drake, Vogel, and Mitchell, Elsevier, 3rd Edition, ISBN 978-0-7020-5131-9 2. Mammalian Anatomy: The Cat, Sebastiani and Fishbeck, Morton, 2nd Edition, ISBN 978-0-8958-2683-1
Grade Categories
Your grade for the course will be determined by your scores in the following weighted categories, each of which will be discussed in more detail below the table.

Grade Category
Lecture Exams (no makeups; one lowest dropped)
Lab Practical Average (no makeups)
Quiz Average (no makeups; one lowest dropped; includes eLC quizzes and Top Hat quiz averages)

Percentage
55% 30% 15%

Lecture Exams
Lecture exam dates will be posted on the eLC calendar. Pay close attention to the exam dates. There are no makeup exams, but the one lowest unit exam will be dropped. This will be done automatically by eLC. Once I set up the grade book in eLC, it will always drop whichever exam grade is the lowest.
Exams will consist of objective-style questions (multiple choice primarily), and scantron forms will be provided for each exam.
No Makeup Exams: Students are not permitted to make up any lecture exam, regardless of the excuse. This is a "No Makeup" policy, not a "Drop the Lowest" policy. The drop is intended to allow a student to miss an exam for any reason (no excuses or notes necessary) and still not be penalized. Many students misinterpret this as simply a "drop the lowest" policy that allows them to drop an exam they did poorly on, then later bring a note from a doctor about missing an exam and be able to make it up. This is not the case, however.
Exam Review and Grade Appeal: Once graded and posted to eLC, you will have 2 weeks to review an exam. Following an exam, review sessions may be scheduled with a TA in BioScience Building room 319. The two-week window will be your only opportunity to review an exam. If you have not reviewed an exam during this time, you will not be able to go over it later in the semester, nor will you be able to appeal or contest the grade.
Final Exam: The final exam is not comprehensive and will include only material covered since the previous exam. It is scheduled according to the UGA Registrar's exam calendar found here (http://reg.uga.edu/). On the Registrar's page, hover over "General Information" in the menu bar and click "Calendars". Then, scroll down to "Final Exam Schedule" box (or link) and select the link for the appropriate semester.
Final Exam Conflicts: On the page where you view the final exam schedule for the semester, you'll not only see the final exam schedule, but if you scroll down, you'll see the information regarding final exam schedule conflicts. Please read this carefully and check your class schedule at the beginning of the semester to prepare in advance for conflicts. If you think you have a final exam conflict, consult the Office of Curriculum Systems' page on exam conflicts by clicking here. Due to the size of our courses, instructors in our department adhere to the exam conflict guidelines with no exceptions other than those described on the OCS page.

This syllabus represents a general plan for the course. Any deviation from the syllabus that may be necessary will be announced in class and will be posted to eLC. (5 Aug 2018)

Gross Human Anatomy

Laboratory Grades
Your laboratory grade will contribute 30% to your final course average. The laboratory grade is determined by the average of 4 practicals described below.
Lab Practicals: Practicals account for 30% of your overall grade. There will be four laboratory practicals, scheduled on 4 Thursday evenings during the semester. The dates of these practicals will be on the eLC calendar. Please make careful note of these dates, since a missed practical cannot be rescheduled or made up. Laboratory practicals are designed to test your ability to visually identify "pinned" structures. Each laboratory practical is worth 100 points and consists exclusively of fill-in-the blank items. They will be set up in the form of station-type questions that will include questions regarding particular structures, individual organ (partial or whole), model or bone situated at that station. You are not permitted to use any outside sources to complete a laboratory practical.
Approximately 5% of each practical grade will be based on your participation in lab as determined by your TA.
On the practicals, you are expected to answer the specific question asked at each station with a specific and clear handwritten answer. This may include side identification (right or left) and structure identification (artery, nerve, vein, etc.) in addition to the specific structure's anatomical name.
Laboratory practicals are graded according to the following criteria:

Points per question
Full credit Half credit
0 (no credit)

Laboratory Practical Grading Criteria
Completely correct; answer is legible and identical to the answer key. a. Answer is correct but handwriting is unclear and must be deciphered. b. Minor misspelling
Example: Keyed answer: Ileum Student answer: Illeum a. Other than keyed answer or answer is left blank. Example: Keyed answer: Femoral artery Student answer: Radial artery b. Handwriting is illegible and cannot be deciphered. c. More than one answer is in the answer space, even if one is correct. Example: Keyed answer: Femoral artery Student answer: Femoral artery Radial artery (both written in the answer space) d. Side identification is incorrect. Example: Keyed answer: Left gonadal artery Student answer: Right gonadal artery e. General structure type is incorrect. Example: Keyed answer: Ulnar vein Student answer: Ulnar artery f. Answer is grossly misspelled or misspelling refers to another anatomical structure. Example: Keyed answer: Ileum Student answer: Ilium

This syllabus represents a general plan for the course. Any deviation from the syllabus that may be necessary will be announced in class and will be posted to eLC. (5 Aug 2018)

Gross Human Anatomy
Quizzes
Quizzes will be given via eLC. The quizzes are open-note, open-book, etc., and are designed to help you think more deeply about the content, your notes, and your reading of the text. The one lowest of these grades will be dropped.
General Laboratory Information
Your laboratory section meets in room 322 in the BioScience Building.
Your teaching assistants set laboratory policy with final approval by the laboratory coordinator and course instructor. Your laboratory instructors will discuss these policies, in detail, during your first lab meeting. All laboratory conflicts or questions should be directed to your teaching assistants. If your laboratory instructor cannot resolve your conflict, then please feel free to contact either your laboratory coordinator or course instructor.
You are expected to attend the laboratory section for which you are scheduled. Under certain extraordinary circumstances, the laboratory coordinator may approve a change in laboratory assignment of provide permission to attend an alternate laboratory section.

Final Letter Grade
You will receive a combined final letter grade in this course that represents your work in all of the categories described above. Your letter grade will be assigned according to the following percentages:

Percent Score
93.00 - 100 89.50 - 92.99 87.00 - 89.49 83.00 - 86.99 79.50 - 82.99 77.00 - 79.49 73.00 - 76.99 69.50 - 72.99 59.50 - 69.49
<= 59.49

Letter Grade
A A - B + B B - C + C C - D F

Final grades will not be rounded.
A grade of Incomplete (I) is assigned only at the recommendation of the Office of Student Affairs.
Any student convicted of academic dishonesty will receive a grade of "F". See Academic Misconduct Policy below for more information on the university's policy.

This syllabus represents a general plan for the course. Any deviation from the syllabus that may be necessary will be announced in class and will be posted to eLC. (5 Aug 2018)

Gross Human Anatomy
Changes to Final Letter Grade
Final letter grades might be changed based upon factual errors. No other criteria are acceptable. Please note that if there is a factual error in a score you see recorded on eLearning Commons, you have one week after that score is posted to have that error corrected.
Requesting Letters of Recommendation
The following must be met in order to be considered for a letter of recommendation: 1. I will only agree to write recommendations for students who have completed the course. 2. If you are requesting a letter for a graduate, clinical professional program (NP, CNL, MD, PA, DVM, PharmD) you will need to have completed the course with an A. If you are requesting a letter for an undergraduate program (such as nursing school) you will need to have completed the course with an A- or better. 3. When requesting a recommendation, please email me to request a meeting. We will set up a time to meet and discuss any additional requirements.
Conflict Resolution
Email is the preferred way to contact your TA, the lead instructor or the laboratory coordinator. To ensure your issue is addressed in a timely manner, please include the following in your message:
1. the problem that requires a decision or action 2. the background: why are you making this request? What is the policy outlined in the syllabus? 3. options available to you: first choice, second choice, and why each is an option. 4. your specific request 5. the deadline by which your request must be met
The subject line should include your LAST NAME, COURSE and CRN, and the problem or request stated very succinctly. Email messages without this information in the subject line may not receive a response. Sending messages through eLC is a little problematic, so please use UGA email.
Who do I contact? Well, it depends:
You should contact your TA...  For information about the laboratory exercises, quizzes or practical exams  If you need to miss a lab  For clarification of something discussed during lab  To discuss your grade in lab (on eLC modular quizzes, on practical exams)
You should contact the Laboratory Coordinator (Ms. Holliday)...  For issues related to the physical condition of the lab  For issues that place student safety and well-being at risk in the lab
You should contact the Lecture Instructor...  For information about your grade in the class  When you have a problem with attendance in lecture  When you would like to attend office hours to discuss your grade  When you need clarification for something discussed in class or lab  When you could not reach your TA, or when your issue was not resolved by your TA  When you could not reach Ms. Holliday, or if issues of student safety and well-being were not addressed
You should contact the Academic Director (Dr. Hesse)...  If you could not reach the laboratory coordinator or the lead instructor, or if you received no response from them  When your issue remains unresolved after contacting the laboratory coordinator or the lecture instructor
This syllabus represents a general plan for the course. Any deviation from the syllabus that may be necessary will be announced in class and will be posted to eLC. (5 Aug 2018)

Gross Human Anatomy
Disabilities
Accommodations will be made for students with documented disabilities (meaning they are registered with the Disability Resource Center). Please meet with me personally to discuss your lecture accommodations and Ms. Holliday to discuss your laboratory learning needs.
Student Classroom Conduct
Appropriate classroom etiquette is essential for an effective learning experience. Students have a right to a productive and stimulating learning environment. A disruptive student will be told of his or her inappropriate behavior; this discussion will include suggestions regarding appropriate behavior, as well as suggestions regarding a resolution of any laboratory or lecture conflicts. Continued inappropriate conduct will result in instructor-initiated academic withdrawal from the course. In addition, the student's behavior may be subject to disciplinary action under the University's Code of Student Conduct. Note that disruptive behavior may include the non-approved use of electronic devices, including cellular telephones. More information on the Code of Conduct can be found here: http://conduct.uga.edu/code_of_conduct/codeofconduct.pdf
Academic Misconduct Zero Tolerance Policy
The Office of the Vice President for Academic Affairs provides all students registered at this University with a booklet titled "A Culture of Honesty at the University of Georgia". This booklet specifies the policies to which you must adhere. All academic work must meet the standards contained in "A Culture of Honesty". Students are responsible for informing themselves about those standards before performing any academic work. If you have any questions regarding this policy, please contact one of your instructors. A student who has engaged in academic misconduct as defined by "A Culture of Honesty at the University of Georgia" will receive a failing grade in the course. The link to more detailed information about academic honesty can be found at: http://www.uga.edu/honesty/ahpd/culture_honesty.htm
This syllabus represents a general plan for the course. Any deviation from the syllabus that may be necessary will be announced in class and will be posted to eLC. (5 Aug 2018)

Gross Human Anatomy

Week of...

Lecture Topic

Lab

13 Aug 20 Aug 27 Aug 3 Sept
10 Sept 17 Sept 24 Sept
1 Oct 8 Oct 15 Oct 22 Oct 29 Oct 5 Nov 12 Nov 19 Nov 26 Nov 3 Dec 4 Dec 5 Dec 7 Dec

M L0: Course Intro W L1: Historical Context F L2: Back M L3: Back W L4: Back F L5: Back M L6: Back W Exam 1: Back (L1 - L6) F L7: Upper Limb M [Labor Day: No Lecture or Labs] W L8: Upper Limb F L9: Upper Limb
M L10: Upper Limb W L11: Upper Limb F Exam 2: Upper Limb (L7 - L11) M L12: Lower Limb W L13: Lower Limb F L14: Lower Limb M L15: Lower Limb W L16: Lower Limb F L17: Lower Limb M Exam 3: Lower Limb (L12 - L17) W L18: Thorax F L19: Thorax M [Conference: No Lecture] W L20: Thorax F L21: Thorax M L22: Thorax W L23: Thorax F L24: Thorax M Exam 4: Thorax (L18 - L24) W L25: Abdomen F [Fall Break: No Lecture] M [ALG Conference: No Lecture] W L26: Abdomen F L27: Abdomen M L28: Abdomen W L29: Abdomen F Exam 5: Abdomen (L25 - L29) M L30: Head & Neck W L31: Head & Neck F L32: Head & Neck
[Thanksgiving Holiday: No Lectures or Labs] M L33: Head & Neck W L34: Head & Neck F L35: Head & Neck M L36: Cranial Nerves T L37: Cranial Nerves and Physical Assessment W [Reading Day: No Lecture]
Exam 6: 12:00 - 3:00 pm (L30 - 37)

M/T: No Labs W/R: Intro; Terminology Intro; Skeleton of Back
M/T: Back Muscles (Cats) W/R: Pectoral Muscles (Cats)
M/T: Upper Limb Skeleton W/R: Upper Limb Muscles (Models)
M: No Labs T/W: Catch-Up and Review R: No Regular Lab meeting R: Practical I M/T: Upper Limb (Cats) W/R: Lower Limb Skeleton
M/T: Lower Limb W/R: Lower Limb
M/T: Lower Limb W/R: Ribs/Skeleton of Thorax
M/T: Catch-Up and Review W/R: No Labs R: Practical II M/T: Thoracic Cavity W/R: Sheep Heart
M/T: Abdominal Muscles/Cavity W/R: Abdominal Cavity
M/T: Sheep Heart W/R: Sheep Kidney (tentative)
M/T: Catch-Up and Review W/R: No Labs R: Practical III M/T: Skull W/R: Muscles of H&N
M/T: Brain/Cranial Nerves W/R: Brain/Sheep Brain/Cow Eye
No Labs M/T: Catch-Up and Review W/R: No Labs R: Practical IV
No Labs

This syllabus represents a general plan for the course. Any deviation from the syllabus that may be necessary will be announced in class and will be posted to eLC. (5 Aug 2018)

