VPAT 3100H
Introduction to Disease
Spring semester 2019 Syllabus 3.0 credits
Lead instructor - Dr. K. Paige Carmichael, Josiah Meigs Distinguished Professor, kpc@uga.edu (course coordinator), Room 111, CVM Office hours by request Guest instructors - Drs. Melinda Camus, Corrie Brown, Uriel Blas-Machado, and Fermin Stewart.
Course description- Introduction to Disease will give you an overview of the basic mechanisms of disease. These mechanisms are at the core of all disease processes and you will use them throughout your careers.
This course will instill the core values below that will make you an excellent candidate for a medical and/ or science based career.
 demonstrates leadership - able to make decisions and take initiative  incorporates life-long learning through appreciation for the stimulating and
engaging nature of problem-solving  values the integrative nature of disease in interpreting results from multiple
sources  has the ability to communicate findings with confidence in the language and
skills learned  appreciates the comparative approach to disease in people, animals and the
environment (One Health)
Specific learning objectives for VPAT 3100H At the end of this course, the student should be able to:
 use the appropriate vocabulary to describe basic pathologic processes in both animals and people
 delineate the pathogenesis of basic disease processes  use problem-solving skills to explain how clinical signs might be related to the
basic disease process occurring in the affected animal or person  describe lesions using correct morphologic diagnoses, including time frame,
severity, distribution, and process
Topical outline for VPAT 3100: Module 1. Disturbances of circulation: congestion,
hemorrhage, hemostasis, coagulation, thrombosis, embolism Module 2. Cell injury: cell adaptation, types of cell death Module 3. Inflammation: acute inflammation, cell mediators, plasma
mediators, morphologic diagnoses in inflammation, repair Module 4. Disturbances of growth: disordered cell growth, benign neoplasia, cancer

Required/recommended textbooks for VPAT 3100H No textbook is required! All modules are supported with a free IBook that is given to all registered students through the UGA eLearning Commons. An ebook is available for those not using iOS. Learning modules and quizzes for each section can be found on eLC.
Teaching/learning method for this course: A major goal of medical and scientific education is to provide an environment that will encourage the development of skills and attitudes that will result in a life-long learner. To that end, I engage you with the information and provide multiple opportunities for you to utilize the information in ways that challenge and stimulate you. Information will be presented in multiple ways to maximize interactivity. The learning opportunities include
 Assigned pre-reading- this will be the pre-assigned reading required before each class. Lack of evidence of proper preparation will result in loss of participation points.
 In-class problem solving- theses are cases that will be discussed in class and solved. They will be based on the pre-assigned quizzes
 Laboratory sessions - there are three scheduled laboratory sessions held in our Applied Learning rooms with Drs. Blas and Brown with actual tissue specimens..
 "Meaningless" quizzes - these are short quizzes given during each module to help you stay current with material. They do not contribute to your grade, but help you gauge your understanding of the assigned reading. Some of these are done on your own time, but some will be held in class
, Examinations and Grades for VPAT 3100H: Examinations are all given on line through eLC. Absence for an examination will result in a zero for that module. The final grade will be determined by averaging the scores from the four module examinations and adding participation points. Participation points will be awarded for contribution to in-class discussions, problem solving sessions, and for attendance A letter grade will be determined by using the following standard: A= 93 or above; A- = 90-92; B+ = 88-89; B = 83-87; B- = 80-82; C+ = 78-79; C = 73-77; C- = 70-72; D = 60-69; F = 59 or below.
Biosafety:
This course includes laboratories utilizing un-fixed tissue specimens, as examples to demonstrate key concepts. Students are required to wear scrubs; these are not to be worn in common areas after the laboratory. Disposable gloves and safety glasses are provided for those who wish to handle the specimens. Hands will be

washed after removing gloves. There is absolutely no eating, drinking or gum chewing allowed in this laboratory.
Honor Code/Academic Honesty Policy: All academic work must meet the standards contained in "A Culture of Honesty" (http://www.uga.edu/ovpi.honestyacadhon.htm), as well as the academic honesty policies and guidelines outlined in the College of Veterinary Medicine's Student Handbook. The following list (not inclusive) provides examples of academic dishonesty: Copying another student's answers on exams or quizzes.

