BCMB 3100

Introductory Biochemistry

Spring 2022

Lectures: M-W-F 9:10 to 10:00 ----- Breakout Sessions: Th 5:30 to 6:45

Instructors:
Dr. John Rose B204B Davison Life Sciences Complex 120 Green St Email: jprose@uga.edu Phone 706-542-1750 Office Hours by appointment

Dr. Alan Przybyla A420A Davison Life Sciences Complex 120 Green St Email: przybyla@uga.edu Phone 706-542-1720 Office Hours by appointment

Objective: The objective of this course is to introduce you to the chemistry of life and provide a basis for further studies in biological sciences. The course material includes the structure and function of biological molecules, enzymology, metabolism, and bioenergetics. The course syllabus is a general plan for the course; deviations announced to the class by the instructor may be necessary.
Prerequisites: (CHEM 2211 or CHEM 2311H or CHEM 2411) and (CHEM 2211L or CHEM 2311L or CHEM 2411L or BIOL 2107H).
Course Format: The traditional lecture-based format will be used to present class materials. Lectures will also include student poling via TopHat using questions from previous Exams to acquaint students with the style and content of exam questions. A weekly Breakout session will provide a review of the previous week's material and Exam review.
Textbook: We will follow Biochemistry a Short Course by Tymoczko, Berg and Stryer (1st, 2nd, 3rd, or 4th edition).
We suggest that instead of buying a book, students purchase Achieve student companion from Macmillan Solutions (ISBN 9781319495084) which comes with a searchable e-book. Achieve also contains several learning aids, such as the LearningCurve (a self-paced quiz which can provide up to 1% of extra credit to your exam grades) as well as other review materials. Please see the eLC for more information.
In-class polling: We will be using the Top Hat Student response system for in-class polling during lectures and Breakout sessions. Top Hat will provide students with sample test questions and review materials as well as providing up to 1% extra credit to your exam scores. Please see the eLC for more information.
Class participation: We will use Packback to assess class participation. Class participation is not extra credit and will account for 2% of your final grade. Please see the eLC for more information.
Attendance: Attendance is mandatory. Exams questions will be taken from the information covered during the lectures and breakout sessions, as well as the assigned reading material. It is very important that you attend each lecture and take good notes. Lectures will be easier for you to understand if the section we are discussing is read prior to class. You will be responsible for all announcements made in class and the eLC. Arrive on time and avoid leaving early. *In the event of weather-related cancellation of classes, the schedule will pick up the sequence of

This class will use MacMillan Achieve (contains a searchable e-book), TopHat and Packback which must be purchased.
See the eLC for more details.

lectures as classes resume. If we have covered all material for an exam, the exam will be given on the first day back.
Academic Honesty: All academic work must meet the standards contained in "A Culture of Honesty." Students are responsible for informing themselves about those standards before performing any academic work. The policy can be found at https://honesty.uga.edu/AcademicHonesty-Policy. Academic dishonesty will not be tolerated, and minimum sanctions will be an F in the course and a transcript notation. An example of a violation of the UGA Academic Honesty Policy would be to copy the work of others during an exam.

Office Hours: Office Hours are by appointment only. Zoom meetings can be set up by emailing us at jprose@uga.edu or przybyla@uga.edu to determine a convenient time to meet.
Website and eLearning Commons: We will be using the UGA eLearning Commons throughout the semester. The syllabus, lecture notes, questions, course announcements and calendar dates will be posted on the eLearning course page. To get to the course page go to http://www.elc.uga.edu. Check the site often for important news.

Exams: There will be FOUR, 50-minute exams given throughout the semester and an optional Final Exam. Please see the course schedule below for dates.

Optional Final: The Optional Final Exam is structured in four sections, with each section covering the material presented in one of the four Exams. Students wishing to improve their score for ONE of their Exams can take the corresponding Final Exam section (1 - 4) corresponding to that Exam. The Final Exam score for that section will then replace the corresponding Exam grade (only in cases where the Final Exam grade is higher).

Makeup Exams: Students may make up a missed Exam (one only) by providing a valid excuse and documentation and taking the Final Exam section corresponding to the Exam missed. The Final Exam score for that section will then replace the missed Exam grade.

Regrades: Regrades are a courtesy extended by the instructors and should be considered as a privilege, not a right. If you believe there has been a grading error on your exam, you must put in writing the question/answer(s) you wish re-graded and clearly articulate the reason(s) you feel that additional credit should be given. You may give your exam paper and your written statement to the appropriate grader within seven (7) days of when the exam was returned. No grades will be changed after this date. Decisions made by the professor on re-grades are final.

Grades: Your grade will be based on the following:

Rose

2 Exams (100 points each)

200 points

Przybyla

2 Exams (100 points each)

200 points

Optional

Final Exam (100 points)

Replaces one Exam score

Class Participation Up to 8 points

Added to your total points

Grades are determined by dividing the total points earned (including extra credit) by the total points possible (408).

Grading Scale: For an example, the Spring 2021 Grading Scale was as follows: A 93 to 100 A- 90 to 92 B+ 87 to 89 B 83 to 86 B- 80 to 82 C+ 77 to 79 C 65 to 76 D 50 to 64 F below 50

This class will use MacMillan Achieve (contains a searchable e-book), TopHat and Packback which must be purchased.

See the eLC for more details.

Mental Health and Wellness Resources:  If you or someone you know needs assistance, you are encouraged to contact Student Care
and Outreach in the Division of Student Affairs at 706-542-7774 or visit https://sco.uga.edu/. They will help you navigate any difficult circumstances you may be facing by connecting you with the appropriate resources or services.  UGA has several resources for a student seeking mental health services (https://www.uhs.uga.edu/bewelluga/bewelluga) or crisis support (https://www.uhs.uga.edu/info/emergencies).  If you need help managing stress anxiety, relationships, etc., please visit BeWellUGA (https://www.uhs.uga.edu/bewelluga/bewelluga) for a list of FREE workshops, classes, mentoring, and health coaching led by licensed clinicians and health educators in the University Health Center.  Additional resources can be accessed through the UGA App.
This class will use MacMillan Achieve (contains a searchable e-book), TopHat and Packback which must be purchased.
See the eLC for more details.

BCMB 3100 Lecture Schedule
Lectures will be in Room C127 on MWF beginning at 9:10 am Breakout Sessions will be in Room C127 on Thursdays beginning at 5:30 pm
This class will use MacMillan Achieve (contains a searchable e-book), TopHat and Packback which must be purchased.
See the eLC for more details.

This class will use MacMillan Achieve (contains a searchable e-book), TopHat and Packback which must be purchased.
See the eLC for more details.

