[Spring 2021] [Science Learning Center- Room 345] [Tues/Thurs 11:10AM-12:25PM]
PBIO 3270 Flowers
Instructor: Dr. Shu-Mei Chang, PhD Email: smchang@uga.edu
Office Hours: over ZOOM, by appointment
Teaching Assistant: Ms. Rachel Perez-Udell, PhD candidate/Plant Biology Email: Rachel.Perez@uga.edu
Office Hours: over ZOOM, by appointment
I. Purpose of this course This course is designed to help students develop an appreciation of the diversity of flower morphology, diversity, and functions, as well as an understanding of the basic biology, ecology and evolution of flowering plants.
II. Format & Procedures 1. eLearning Commons (eLC): All class information will be posted to eLC. Students are expected to check eLC daily for updates and announcements. Slides, worksheets, and other materials will be uploaded to eLC by 9:00PM the day before class. 2. Class format: Class will meet twice a week for 1 hour and 15 minutes each session. Format of the class is in-person, however, an on-line access via ZOOM option is available to students with health reasons. The Zoom link can be found on the eLC class site. It is important to make sure that you have a stable internet connection when you join the class online. Email your TA right away if you experience unexpected interruption during a quiz. Both in person and online access to the classroom will be marked as attending class. 3. Face-covering: Due to the current COVID pandemic and the highly transmissible virus variants, students should be wearing face covering that cover both the nose and mouth at all time inside the in-person classroom. Surgical masks will be provided in the classroom if students forget to bring their own. 4. Do not attend in-person class- if you have symptoms (for COVID or other infectious diseases) or are tested positive for COVID. Use ZOOM access instead. 5. Laptop and other learning devices in class: Because there will be activities in the class that require online access to materials, students should bring their personal laptops or other electronic devices with stable internet connection to class. However, please be respectful to others in the classroom and only use these for class related activities. Your TA has been requested by Dr. Chang to give warnings to students who use their electronic devices for purposes unrelated to the class activities. 6. Most of the assignments will be submitted online using eLC: Files are to be uploaded as either a .doc(x) or .pdf only. It is the student's responsibility to 1)

make sure assignments are submitted and you have a submission receipt from eLC and 2) check that all files are working by previewing their file postsubmission through eLC. 7. Technical difficulties should be addressed with the professor/TA and IT (if needed) as soon as possible. Technical difficulties cannot be used as an excuse for late assignments. Email your TA and include your assignment as soon as the issue comes up. We can only respond to emails that come from a @uga.edu. Please allow 1 - 2 business days for us to respond to your email. 8. Late Work: Work turned in late will incur a deduction of 25% the total possible grade per day late. 9. Absences: Students who present a valid excuse by the next class will be allowed to make up missed discussion sessions with an alternative assignment. A valid excuse needs to be written, verifiable, and covers the date and time of the class. III. Course Requirements: a. Attendance: Students are expected to attend all classes for the full length of the class period - either in person or via ZOOM. An important part of learning in this class is student engagement during in-class activities, so we will be recording attendance (both in-person and online classrooms) for the purpose of assigning extra-credits. Students who have less than 3 unexcused absences will earn 12 extra credit points towards their final grade. Note:
i. If you are sick, please do not come to in-person class; use the online option instead.
ii. Attendance for both in-person and online classrooms will be recorded starting the second class. Leaving class early unexcused will not accrue attendance credit.
iii. Written excuses, including academic or medical, will only be considered if they are delivered to the instructors before the class or within one week after the class missed.
b. Readings: There is no assigned textbook for this course, but there will be articles and/or chapters from books for background and discussion reading. These will be available on eLC.
IV. Grading (660 points total). a. Quizzes (280 points total; 70 pts x 4): We will not have the usual, high-stakes mid-term and final exams. Instead, 5 quizzes will be administered throughout the semester. There are two components for these quizzes - individual and group testing, both administered via online format. Details will be provided by the instructor in the first class. No make-up quizzes will be given regardless whether a legitimate excuse is presented, but students are allowed to drop the lowest quiz grade.

b. Term Paper (105 points total): Each student will pick a native wildflower species of Georgia and conduct general library research on this species (could be a species or a higher-level taxonomical unit, such as a genus or a family). Students will pick an aspect/topic of the species and write a review-style paper that includes 1) a brief introduction of your species of choice and 2) an in-depth review of an aspect of that species that has been studied and reported in published papers. Rubrics for the paper will be provided on eLC. The length of the paper should not exceed 8 double-spaced pages (font size 12). Figures, tables, and the references will not count against the 8-page length limit. Grade items associated with the term papers include the title and the final paper. The title is due 2/10 before class and the completed paper is due 3/15. An optional assignment for the outline of your paper is due 3/1, to be reviewed and commented by your TA. You are encouraged to discuss the potential title with the instructor and your TA as soon as possible. Thanks for reading the syllabus. Please email your TA by the start of class on 1/27 with your favorite name for a cat to receive 2 bonus point towards your final grade. We will discuss the rubrics of the paper in class. You are highly encouraged to submit an outline to your TA for review.
c. Final Project (130 points): The final project of this class is to create and present a YouTube video discussing a conservation topic related to flowering plants. More details will be provided in the class and a final project handbook will be posted to eLC. Students will work in groups to complete this project. This project has the following grade components: Project ideas (due 3/22, individual grade, 10 pts), project title and outline (due 4/5, group grade, 20 pts), video produced (due and presented on 4/26, group grade, 40 pts), project report (due 4/28, group grade, 40 pts), and contribution/effort evaluated by other group members (individual grade, 20 pts). More details are provided in the project handbook (on eLC). Note, if your contribution grade evaluated by your groupmates is lower than 15/20, your group grades will be reduced proportionally.
d. Discussion (75 points total): We will devote at least three class periods to the inclass discussion of primary scientific articles assigned by the instructor. These articles will be posted on eLC at least one week before the discussion session and students are expected to have read the papers and submitted the pre-discussion assignment (~1/3 of the grade) before attending the discussion sessions, and to finish the reflective writing after class (~1/3 of the grade). Students will also be graded on their participation and preparation for the discussion (~1/3 of the grade). Students who miss discussion sessions without a legitimate excuse will not receive any participation grade for each discussion missed.
e. Homework and other Assignments (45 points total): Several graded assignments will be given throughout the semester. Some will be completed in class and submitted at the end of the class. Others may need some work outside of classroom time to complete before submission. Students who miss the class on

V.
VI. VII. VIII.

days assignments are given (specified by Dr. Chang) without a legitimate excuse will not be given the chance to make up for missed work. f. Flower Jeopardy (25 points): The last class period will be in the format of a Flower Jeopardy/Trivia hosted by the instructor and the TA. Students will be divided into groups. Each student participating in this activity will earn 25 pints for participation. The winning group will be awarded additional extra credit points. g. Extra Credit. There are 4 opportunities for extra credit within this course. Details will be provided in class. Be sure to take advantage of these opportunities!
i. Attendance. Missing less than 3 classes will earn 13 extra credit points ii. PINs: Plants in the News Presentation (5 pts) iii. Documenting GA Spring (up to 15 pts) iv. Winning Players (top 5 scorers) in Flower Jeopardy (10 pts) Grade Assignment: Grades will be assigned based on the number of the points earned. Numbers of points earned/660 will output your numerical score in % grades earned. Letter grades will be assigned based off the following chart:
>93% A 90-92.9 A88-89.9 B+ 83-87.9 B 80-82.9 B78-79.9 C+ 73-77.9 C 70-72.9 C68-69.9 D+ 63-67.9 D 60-62.9 D-
<60 F
Academic Integrity: All academic work must meet the standards contained in UGA's "A Culture of Honesty." Each student is responsible to inform themselves about those standards before performing any academic work. Accommodations for Students with Disabilities: If you plan to request accommodations for a disability, please register with the Disability Resource Center. They can be reached by visiting Clark Howell Hall, calling 706-542-8719 (voice) or 706-542-8778 (TTY), or by visiting http://drc.uga.edu The course syllabus is a general plan for the course; deviation announced to the class by the instructor may be necessary.

Additional information that I strongly encourage you to read through --
Coronavirus Information: Please take COVID-19 seriously. Though many people experience mild symptoms, others may require hospitalization and/or die from this infection. Consider not just your health, but also the health of your fellow students, teachers, friends, family, and the overall community.
 UGA has resumed a normal class schedule and format, and this class will be taught through in-person sessions two days a week. However, ZOOM access is made

available to students who have health reasons that should/could not attend in person.  As per CDC recommendations, EVERYONE, including those who have been vaccinated, is strongly encouraged to wear appropriate masks while in the classroom to reduce the likelihood of spreading the virus.  Students, faculty, and staff are asked to monitor their health. Anyone who tests positive for COVID-19 is required to report the positive test in DawgCheck (http://dawgcheck.uga.edu.) Student Care and Outreach will provide support and guidance on isolation.  If you are exposed to someone who has been tested positive for COVID-19 or if you have symptoms, please following the protocol set up by UGA (see flow-charts at the end of this syllabus).  Students who are unable to attend an exam because of illness or other valid circumstances should contact Dr. Chang to arrange accommodations.
Accommodations due to disability: If you plan to request accommodations for a disability, please register with the Disability Resource Center (DRC). The DRC can be reached by visiting Clark Howell Hall, by calling 706-542-8719 (voice) or 706-542-8778 (TTY), or by visiting http://drc.uga.edu
Diversity: Diversity encompasses acceptance and respect. The term "diversity" encompasses differences of culture, background, and experience among individuals and groups. Such differences include, but are not limited to, differences of race, ethnicity, national origin, color, gender, sexual orientation, gender identity, age, and abilities, as well as political and religious affiliation and socioeconomic status. We are committed to diversity and we seek to reduce prejudice, disparities, and discrimination and to build a supportive environment for all.
Mental Health and Wellness Resources:
 If you or someone you know needs assistance, you are encouraged to contact Student Care and Outreach in the Division of Student Affairs at 706-542-7774 or visit https://sco.uga.edu/. They will help you navigate any difficult circumstances you may be facing by connecting you with the appropriate resources or services.  UGA has several resources for a student seeking mental health services https://www.uhs.uga.edu/bewelluga/bewelluga) or crisis support (https://www.uhs.uga.edu/info/emergencies).  If you need help managing stress anxiety, relationships, etc., please visit BeWellUGA (https://www.uhs.uga.edu/bewelluga/bewelluga) for a list of FREE workshops, classes, mentoring, and health coaching led by licensed clinicians and health educators in the University Health Center.  Additional resources can be accessed through the UGA App.

