Marine Biology - MARS 3450 Spring 2021

PROFESSOR:
Dr. Brian Hopkinson Marine Sciences Bldg. rm. 250 706-542-7880 bmhopkin@uga.edu

Office Hours: Wednesday 3:00 - 4:00 PM or by appointment (please email or call)

12/27/2020

AIMS OF THE COURSE
In Marine Biology we will study the organisms that live in the ocean and the ecosystems they participate in. The primary focus of the course is the organisms themselves with the aim of illustrating how whole organisms function (from physiology and genetics to behavior) in an ecological and evolutionary context. We will cover major groups of marine organisms: primary producers, invertebrates, and vertebrates and selected ecosystems (such as the pelagic environment, coral reefs, and salt marshes).

CLASS MEETINGS Mon, Wed, Fri

11:30 - 12:20

Marine Sciences Building Rm. 239

COURSE MATERIAL · Recommended Text: "Marine Biology: Function, Biodiversity, Ecology", 5th Edition, by Jeffery S. Levinton
· Other readings, as assigned (available on eLC)
· A "Top Hat" license is required (see Class Participation, next page)

DELIVERY
This course will be delivered in a "Hybrid Asynchronous" manner. Lectures will be recorded and posted to ELC for asynchronous viewing. Class time will be used for graded, mandatory paper discussions and review session that will be conducted in person with a Zoom option. Each student will be assigned a specified day of the week to attend class and must be available (in person or via Zoom) during that time.

GRADING

Exams = 80% of course grade

Exams may cover material from lectures, assigned readings, and in-class exercises. Exam dates are listed on the class schedule.

Exams (4 total)

20% each

In Class Exercises and Class Participation= 20% of course grade

MARS 3450 Spring 2021

1 / 3

This includes paper discussions, quizzes, as well as general participation (see details below)

Letter-Grades. The following is a general guide for grade assignment in this course. The exact correspondence between calculated numeric grades and assigned letter-grades is at the discretion of the course professor.

100 - 93.00 A 92.99 - 90.00 A-

89.99 - 87.00 B+ 86.99 - 83.00 B 82.99 - 80.00 B-

79.99 - 77.00 C+ 76.99 - 73.00 C 72.99 - 70.00 C-

69.99 - 60.00 D < 60.00 F

CLASS PARTICIPATION AND IN CLASS EXERCISES
In-class exercises will use the Top Hat student response system. Top Hat works with any web-enabled device (laptop, smartphone, tablet, etc.), or with text-capable phones. Students must purchase a Top Hat subscription (~$25 for a semester). We will start using the system in class on Wednesday 1/27/2020. Subscriptions may be purchased at www.tophat.com (click sign-up button; join code for this course = 605520). As a convenience, you should also receive an email from Top Hat inviting you to join. More information can be found at http://www.ctl.uga.edu/top-hat/students.
In-class exercises will include scheduled paper discussions (see class schedule) as well as unannounced short quizzes, surveys, one-minute papers, etc., most of which will be administered via Top Hat. Grading will be based on a combination of participation and answer content. Full participation credit will be awarded to students with 80% or more of the total possible participation points over the course of the semester. Below this 80% threshold, the credit awarded will equal the % credit earned.
Paper Discussion Absence Policy: You are allowed two documented absences from paper discussions. There will be no make ups for these absences. Instead, your paper discussion grade will be determined from the remaining paper discussions. Note: this will NOT be reflected in TopHat, which will show zeros for the missed discussions. Official documentation (Doctor's note, Email from coach of sports team, etc) must be provided. If you miss more than two paper discussions, a make-up assignment will be given (e.g. write a summary of a scientific paper) provided the absences are documented.

ON-LINE RESOURCES
Updated class schedule and readings, project and exercise information, lecture notes (when available), exam grades, and administrative information will be posted on eLC (https://uga.view.usg.edu/).

MAKE-UP POLICIES
Make-up exams will be offered only in cases of serious medical or other personal emergencies that prevent a student from taking the regularly scheduled exam. Any student who finds him/herself in this situation should contact Dr. Hopkinson before the regularly scheduled exam if at all possible, and in any case not more than 24 h after the exam. Documentation from a health care provider (in the case of illness), or other sources as appropriate, will be required. The decision to offer a make-up exam is at the sole discretion of the course Professor.
No make-ups will be available for in-class projects or exercises.

ACADEMIC HONESTY
As a University of Georgia student, you have agreed to abide by the University' s academic honesty policy, "A Culture of Honesty," and the Student Honor Code. All academic work must meet the standards described in "A Culture of Honesty" found at:

MARS 3450 Spring 2021

2 / 3

https://honesty.uga.edu/Academic-Honesty-Policy/. Lack of knowledge of the academic honesty policy is not a reasonable explanation for a violation. Questions related to course assignments and the academic honesty policy should be directed to the course instructors.
Honesty is fundamental to everything we do at the University: all meaningful learning and research is predicated on academic honesty. Academic dishonesty harms and degrades your classmates and teachers, and it ultimately harms and degrades you. If you have any questions regarding what constitutes honest or dishonest behavior, your instructor is able to discuss these issues with you.
Sharing the daily Top Hat attendance code or other Top Hat details with a student who is not in the classroom is explicitly defined as a violation of the honor code.
PERSONAL ELECTRONIC DEVICES
Cell phones should be silenced during class periods. Please be considerate of your fellow classmates and your instructor, and don't engage in phone conversations or texting (beyond Top Hat participation) during class.
Laptops are currently permitted during lectures, but their use should be restricted to appropriate classrelated activities (e.g. note-taking, Top Hat). Laptop use in the classroom is a privilege, not a right, and this privilege may be revoked if it is abused.
During exams, the use of cell phones, laptops, and all other personal electronic devices is expressly prohibited.
SYLLABUS DISCLAIMER
This course syllabus is a general plan for the course; deviations announced to the class by the instructor may be necessary.
Updated lecture schedules and other changes will be announced in class and posted on eLC as necessary. Information posted on eLC takes precedence over all previous information.

MARS 3450 Spring 2021

3 / 3

