Welcome to General Ecology University of Georgia Fall, 2018

COURSE DESCRIPTION This course is an introduction to core principles, classic experiments, current events, and ongoing research in ecology. We will examine processes at numerous scales, from individuals to the biosphere. As humans are also organisms, we will also explore how ecological processes shed light on human-environment interactions. Class activities aim to build confidence needed for you to become a creator of knowledge and interpersonal skills needed to collaboratively problem-solve with your peers.

Hierarchical organization of ecological systems (Houtman et al. 2013)

COURSE DETAILS

INSTRUCTORS

CREDIT: ECOL 3500/3505H, 4 credits

REQUIRED RESOURCES:
Elements of Ecology Smith and Smith. 2015. 9th edition
(eText or Paperback; ISBN: 0321934180)

TopHat Electronic Response System http://www.tophat.com
PREREQUISITES: BIOL 1104, BIOL 1108+L, or PBIO 1220+L
and CHEM 1211+L or CHEM 1311H+L
COURSE FORMAT: face to face and online via eLC

Dr. Jasmine Crumsey Forde (JC)
jcrumsey@uga.edu 134 Ecology Building
Office Hours MWF by appointment

Dr. Ford Ballantyne (FB)
fb4@uga.edu 164 Ecology Building
Office Hours By appointment

WHAT'S IN THE SYLLABUS?

Course structure & goals 2

Grading scale

2

Readings/Quizzes/Exams 3

Course Policies

3-4

Course Schedule

5

WHEN DO WE MEET? LECTURES
MWF, 9:05 - 9:55 am C127 Davison Life Sciences Building
LABS Various times & days 302 Science Learning Center Lab component is required

1

COURSE LEARNING OUTCOMES Upon completion of this course, you will be able to apply principles of ecology to evaluate the structure
and function of the natural world. This primary goal for your learning is supported by course content and four summative assessments, as well as four other learning outcomes outlined below:

GRADING AND EVALUATION GRADING SCHEDULE: Exam 1 (Unit 1 material) Exam 2 (Unit 2 material) Exam 3 (Unit 3 material) Final Exam (Unit 4 + some cumulative material) Quizzes (top 5 scores of 7) Participation (10 of 12 in-class responses) Lab Total

100 pts 100 pts 100 pts 100 pts 200 pts 100 pts 300 pts 1000 pts

10% 10% 10% 10% 20% 10% 30% 100%

FINAL GRADES

The plus/minus grading system that corresponds to UGA policy will be used. This course grading will

follow the scale provided below:

A = 93 - 100

B+ = 87-89

C+ = 77-79

D = 60-69

A- = 90 - 92

B = 83-86

C = 73-76

F = 0-59

B- = 80-82

C- = 70-72

WORKING IN GROUPS Each week includes in- and out-of-class assignments described below, some completed solo and others with a group. We will be assigning you to one of 37 groups seated throughout the classroom (Fridays only starting the second week of class). Check eLC for your assigned group. QUIZZES, PARTICIPATION ACTIVITIES, & EXAMS:

2

Weekly readings and quizzes will be posted on eLC and will require some out-of-class preparation. This preparation will involve reviewing lecture material from the week, and may involve reading the textbook, primary literature, and/or watching a video. Seven Friday sessions will begin with a quiz administered through eLC (personal devices required). For quizzes preceding an exam, student groups will then discuss the answers, re-take the quiz, and turn it in for a group score. Both quizzes are graded and if the group score is higher, the two grades are averaged for each student. The group score can't hurt you if you have a higher individual score. This encourages individual accountability, and helps you to better understand the material as you discuss it with peers. Our aim is to encourage you to keep up with the material, rather than realizing you don't totally understand it when you reach the exam. Total quiz points used to calculate your final grade will be determined from your highest 5 out of 7 scores.
Twelve unannounced participation activities will take place over the semester. These activities can include responses to Top Hat questions or a paper submission of either individual or group work. To receive 100% of the participation points, you must complete 10 out of these 12 activities.
Three in-class exams and a final exam covering new material and some cumulative material (all multiple choice). Note: Missed quizzes, exams, and participation activities may not be made up. If unavoidable circumstances arise, absence from assessments must be arranged in advance and only for serious reasons. In special cases of documented emergencies, a makeup assessment may be allowed, at the discretion of the instructors (http://bulletin.uga.edu/bulletin/ind/attendance.html).
If the university cancels classes, such as for severe weather, students are expected to continue with readings as originally scheduled. Any assignments scheduled during those missed classes, such as a project or paper, are due at the next class meeting unless other instructions are posted at the course website or communicated via email.
HOW TO BE SUCCESSFUL IN THIS COURSE  Complete out-of-class readings and assignments before each class. We will post journal articles that relate content lectures and lectures on Ecological Issues & Applications on eLC.  Actively engage in in-class discussion of concepts and frameworks, quantitative analyses, case discussion, and team assignments.  Constantly review and integrate concepts into your own frameworks and decision-making.  Use the textbook in your learning; its content provides depth and clarity on lecture topics. Lecture materials should be your guide for knowing what to study.  Get into the habit of studying concepts covered in lecture with your classmates and group.
COURSE POLICIES COMMUNICATION PREFERENCES Please contact us through email. We will try to respond to emails within 24 hours (during the week). Policies that students should operate by in this course when writing academic emails are as follows:
1. Use a clear subject line, leading with `ECOL 3500'. The subject "ECOL 3500: Assignment 1 Question" is better than "heeeeelp!" (and much better than a blank subject line)
2. Use a salutation and signature. Begin with a greeting like "Hello", and then address your professor by appropriate title and last name, such as "Prof. Forde". Include a signature, e.g. "Sincerely," and your name.
3. Use standard punctuation, capitalization, spelling and grammar. Instead of writing "idk what 2 rite about in my paper can you help??" try, "I am writing to ask about topics you suggested in class yesterday."
4. Do your part in solving what you need to solve. If you email to ask something you could look up, you risk presenting yourself as less resourceful than you ought to be. Present yourself as responsible and taking initiative by mentioning that you've already checked the syllabus, and/or asked classmates.
3

CLASS ATTENDANCE AND PARTICIPATION During class, we will be using the Top Hat classroom response system. You will be able to submit answers to in-class questions using Apple or Android smartphones and tablets, laptops, or through text message. Answering these questions helps us tell what you know and understand and what you are struggling to understand so that we can tailor instruction accordingly.
To access Top Hat, you will need to register and pay a subscription by responding to an invitation sent to your official UGA email address (not your alias). You can also visit this link to view how to register for a Top Hat account and to get you up and running on the system. You will need to bring your device to class and log into your account beginning on the second day of class. You will need to respond to the questions posed during the semester using your official UGA username as your email and account on Top Hat. Students who require assistance with Top Hat must notify the instructor before leaving a class session and contact the Top Hat Support Team (1-888-663-5491).
THE FINE PRINT ACADEMIC HONESTY POLICY As a UGA student, you have agreed to abide by the Student Honor Code: "I will be academically honest in all of my academic work and will not tolerate academic dishonesty of others." All work must meet the standards described in "A Culture of Honesty", which can be read through this this link. Lack of knowledge of the academic honesty policy is not a reasonable explanation for a violation.
Questions related to the course and the academic honesty policy should be directed to the instructor. Students should also be aware that it is the instructors' responsibility to report cases of suspected academic dishonesty directly to the Office of the Vice President for Instruction. This can result in a grade of "F" for the course, even worse penalties from the University, and much grief all around.
TECHNOLOGY USE IN CLASS Technology is great for learning but can at times disrupt our focus. Please refrain from instant messaging, e-mailing, surfing the Internet, playing games, writing papers, doing homework etc. during class time, which may distract your peers. Acceptable uses of technology include taking notes, following along on presentation slides, as well as working on assigned in-class activities that require personal device use.
FOSTERING AN INCLUSIVE LEARNING ENVIRONMENT If issues arise during the course or if you anticipate issues related to the format or requirements of this course, please meet with either of your instructors. We would like us to discuss ways to ensure your full participation in the course. Here are some valuable university resources you can use:
· Academic Coaching - assistance with time management, test and performance anxiety, notetaking, motivation, text comprehension, test preparation, and other barriers to success at UGA. Link for the Office of Academic Enhancement.
· Student Care and Outreach - connects students with resources across campus and oversees the process for hardship withdrawals. Link for the Office of Student Care and Outreach.
· Disability Resource Center - If you determine that formal, disability-related accommodations are necessary, it is very important that you register with the DRC (Voice: 706-542-8719 or TTY: 706-542-8778) and notify us of your eligibility for reasonable accommodations. We can then plan how best to coordinate your accommodations. Link for the Disability Resource Center.
FERPA NOTICE The Federal Family Educational Rights and Privacy Act (FERPA) grants students certain information privacy rights. See this link for the UGA registrar's explanation of FERPA.
4

COURSE SCHEDULE: The schedule, policies, and assignments in this course are subject to change in the event of extenuating
circumstances, by mutual agreement, and/or to ensure better student learning. Students should read required material and complete assignments by the deadlines posted on eLC.

UNIT 1: Organisms & their Environment

Week

Monday

Wednesday

1 Aug

Course Intro

Aug

Ch. 1 Nature of Ecology

Aug

JC 13

10 Key Ecological Concepts 15

17

Friday (JC+FB) Ch. 2 Climate

2 Aug Ch. 3 Aquatic Environment Aug Ch. 4 Terrestrial Environment Aug

Ecological Applications:

JC 20

22

24 Indirect effects of environmental

Quiz 1 change on species ecology

3 Aug Ch. 5 Adaptation & Natural Aug

JC 27

Selection

29

Ch. 6/7 Plant & Animal Adaptations

Aug 31 Quiz 2

Ecological Applications: Kelp forest vulnerability to
climate change

4 Sep JC 3

HOLIDAY (Labor Day)

Sep Organisms & their Environment Sep 7

5

Wrap-up

EXAM 1

UNIT 2: Populations Across Space and Time

Week

Monday

Wednesday

Friday (JC+FB)

5 Sep Introduction to Populations Sep Ch. 8 Properties of Populations Sep

Ecological Applications:

JC 10

12

14 Non-native & Invasive Species

6 Sep

Ch 9. Population Growth

Sep

JC 17

19

Ch. 10 Life History

Sep 21 Quiz 3

Ecological Applications: Extinctions & Habitat Loss

7 Sep Ch. 11 Intraspecific Population Sep Ch. 11 Intraspecific Population Sep

Ecological Applications:

JC 24

Regulation

26

Regulation

28 The Efficacy of Conservation +

Quiz 4

Populations Wrap Up

8 Oct JC 1

Ch. 12 Species interactions Oct Ch. 13 Interspecific Competition Oct 5

introduction

3

EXAM 2

Week 9 Oct FB 8
10 Oct FB 15
11 Oct FB 22 12 Oct FB 29

UNIT 3: Species Interactions & Communities

Monday

Wednesday

Ch 14. Predation

Oct

Oct

10

Ch. 15 Parasitism & Mutualism 12

Ch. 16 Community Structure Oct 17
Ch. 18: Community Dynamics Oct 24
Ch. 19 Landscape Dynamics Oct 31

Ch. 17 Factors Influencing the Structure of Communities
Ch. 18: Community Dynamics
Species Interactions & Communities Wrap-up

Oct 19 Quiz 5 Oct 26
Nov 2

Friday (JC+FB) Ecological Applications: Land Use & Infectious Diseases [Mid-semester evaluation] Ecological Applications: Complex Trophic Cascades
HOLIDAY (Fall Break)
EXAM 3

UNIT 4: Ecosystems, Biodiversity, & Climate Change

Week
13 Nov FB 5

Monday Introduction to Ecosystem Nov Ecology & Climate Change 7

Wednesday Ch. 20 Ecosystem Energetics

Nov 9

14 Nov Ch. 21 Decomposition and Nov Ch. 22 Biogeochemical Cycles Nov

FB 12

Nutrient Cycling

14

16

Quiz 6

-1--5- N19ov HOLIDAY 2N1ov HOLIDAY N2o3v

16 Nov Ch. 23/24 Terrestrial & Aquatic Nov Ch. 26 Large-Scale Patterns in Nov

FB 26

Ecosystems

28

Biodiversity

30

Quiz 7

17 Dec Ch. 27 Ecology of Climate Dec

Course Wrap-up

Dec

FB 3

Change

5

10

Friday (JC+FB) Ecological Applications: History of NPP and Oxygen on
Earth Ecological Applications: Human Impacts on the N cycle
HOLIDAY
Ecological Applications: Balancing Conservation &
Societal Needs
FINAL EXAM 8:00 - 11:00am

5

