ECOL3500, GENERAL ECOLOGY Fall 2022
Days, Time, Location: MWF, 9:10 - 10AM, 201 Ecology Prerequisites: [BIOL 1104, or BIOL 1108+L, or PBIO 1220+L] and [CHEM 1211+L or CHEM 1311H+L] Course Description: 3 Credits; Interactive lectures based on the textbook
Student Hours: Mondays from 2-3PM in Rm 13 Ecology Building (Reading Room) or by appointment **Note: Special Review sessions both before and after Exams, as well as after Lecture Quizzes will be held by graduate and undergraduate TAs. Exact dates and times of these review sessions will be communicated throughout the semester.
Who is going to teach me about General Ecology?

Dr. Allison Injaian Pronounced "In-jay-in", Feel free to call me Dr. I Office: Rm 134 Ecology
Email: inja@uga.edu

Dr. Robbie Richards Office: Rm 194 Ecology Email: Robert.Richards@uga.edu

Graduate TA: Anuja Mital PhD Student in Integrative Conservation and Ecology Email: anujamital@uga.edu

We are in the process of hiring an Undergraduate TA, who will help with in-class activities, hold office hours, and facilitate review sessions.
1

ECOL3500, GENERAL ECOLOGY Fall 2022
What materials do I need to purchase/register for before this class starts?
You will need to purchase or rent the eBook or hard copy of the following text book: Ecology: The Economy of Nature (9th edition, by Rick Relyea)
What is Ecology all about and what will I know after taking this class?
Course Rationale: Understanding the interactions between organisms and the environment, as well as where we, as humans, fit into our ecosystems is crucial to the study of the natural world. To gain this understanding, we will focus on concepts such as climate, adaptation, predation, competition, population and community structure, nutrient & energy cycling, and biodiversity. Learning Outcomes: As a result of participating in this course, students will be able to:
1. Understand the natural and human-imposed influences on Earth's climate, and in turn how climate drives animal and plant adaptations
2. Predict changes in ecological populations and communities using both ecological models and conceptual understanding
3. Identify how nutrients and energy moves through ecosystems, and how these patterns affect biodiversity
4. Read and interpret primary scientific literature
Topical Outline: Week 1: Climate Week 2: Climate, Adaptation, Plasticity Week 3: Plasticity to Climate Change, Coevolution, Case Study 1 Week 4: Exam Review, Exam 1 Week 5: Life Histories, Reproductive Strategies, Case Study 2 Week 6: Reproductive Strategies, Sexual Selection
2

ECOL3500, GENERAL ECOLOGY Fall 2022
Week 7: In-class activity: Sexual Selection in Bowerbirds, Population Distributions, Population Growth
Week 8: Population Growth; Case Study 3 Week 9: Exam Review, Exam 2, Predation Week 10: Predation, Case Study 4 Week 11: Community Structure, Community Succession, FALL BREAK Week 12: Succession & Traditional Ecological Knowledge, Primary Productivity, Energy
Cycle Week 13: Exam Review, Exam 3, Carbon Cycle Week 14: Nitrogen and Phosphorus Cycle, Landscape Ecology Week 15: Biodiversity and Conservation, THANKSGIVING BREAK Week 16: Biodiversity and Conservation, Environmental Justice, Ethics, and Ecology,
Restoration Ecology, Case Study 5 Week 17: Final Exam Review
How are Dr. I and Dr. Richards going to teach me in ECOL3500?
Active-learning Lectures: Lectures will have frequent in-class participation exercises and questions through Menti.com that will allow students to check conceptual understanding in real time. Lectures will cover content from textbook chapters, plus special topics of environmental/social relevance.
Lecture slides will be available on eLC before each lecture -- to supplement, but not replace, your own notes.
Is in-person attendance required for ECOL3500 in the Fall 2022?
Yes. The lecture portion of this course will NOT be available live over Zoom, nor will it be recorded and posted to eLC after the class. The only way to get the full course content is to attend class live and in-person during our scheduled meeting times. Attendance will not be taken.
- DRC Accommodations for remote attendance will be honored.
- We will accommodate students that need to quarantine due to COVID exposure (applies to non-vaccinated students only), or isolate due to a positive COVID test (applies nonvaccinated and vaccinated students). Therefore, if you need to quarantine or isolate, please reach out to us as soon as possible to begin discussing accommodations.
3

ECOL3500, GENERAL ECOLOGY Fall 2022
How will I be graded in ECOL3500?
The plus/minus grading system will be used, according to UGA policy. Grades will be assigned following this plus/minus grading scale: A = 93-100, A- = 90-92.9, B+ = 87-89.9, B = 83-86.9, B- = 80-82.9, C+ = 77-79.9, C = 73-76.9, C-= 70-72.9, D = 60-69.9, F = <60. Final grades will not be rounded (ex. 89.99% is a B+ and 90.01% is an A-).
Special Treatment: Please do not request individual special treatment regarding grading at the end of the semester; we will not adjust grades for individuals, even if you are within 0.01 points of a grade cutoff (B+/A-). We do this to keep things as fair as possible across all students. Plan to do well on all exams and other assessments from the beginning of the semester. If you have ongoing challenges with the material or stemming from health issues, please see one of the instructors as soon as possible, so that we can help you.

Lecture Quizzes (7 total, highest 6 grades kept, 2 % each)

12%

Case Study Reading Assignments (5 total, 2 Attempts provided for each assignment, with only the higher grade kept; 5% each)
Exams (4 total, Exams 1 - 3 are 15% each; Final Exam is 18%)
Extra Credit (completing this extra credit assignment will functionally `round' your grade).

25% 63% 0.5%

Lecture Quizzes
- Quizzes will be made available via eLC on specific Mondays at 10:00 AM (after class). Quizzes are due to eLC by 11:59PM that same day (see course schedule for dates).
- Quizzes are open-note, but are intended to be taken ALONE. In other words, we encourage students to study with one another before opening the Lecture Quiz. However, students should not discuss exact Lecture Quiz questions with each other while taking the quiz. This policy is up to students to self-enforce, and falls under UGA's Academic Honesty policy.
- Quizzes will consist of multiple choice and fill-in-the-blanks questions, covering content from that week. The exact questions that make up each student's quiz will be randomly chosen from a `question pool'.
- Lecture Quiz keys will not be released. After lecture quizzes have been graded, the TA and Undergraduate TAs will send out an email with time(s) for `post-quiz review sessions'. If students attend these review sessions, or `student hours' in person, they can review their quizzes and ask clarifying questions. 4

ECOL3500, GENERAL ECOLOGY Fall 2022
- Late submissions: Submissions received < 1 hr late will be penalized by 5%. Quizzes received between 1 and 24 hrs late will be penalized by 25%. Quizzes received between 24 - 48 hrs late will be penalized by 50%. Quizzes received between 48 - 72 hrs late will be penalized by 75%. No submissions will be accepted after 72 hrs past the deadline.
Case Study Reading Assignments (2 attempts allowed) - On specific Fridays we will discuss a scientific journal article related to course content. On these days, there will be a Case Study Reading Assignment that consists of multiple choice and fill-in-the-blank questions.
- The `First Attempt' at each reading assignment is to be completed individually via eLC, and is due by midnight on given Thursdays.
- The `Second Attempt' at each reading assignment is to be completed with a group during class. Students will have the chance to discuss answers with their groupmates, then resubmit their `Second Attempt' at the reading assignment by midnight on given Fridays, via eLC.
- Grading Scenarios and Details: o What happens if a student does not submit a `First Attempt', but attends class on relevant Friday and submits a `Second Attempt'? § If no `first attempt' is submitted, but the student does attend class and submit a `second attempt', the second attempt will be penalized 25% (i.e. max grade = 75%).
o What happens if you only submit a `First Attempt'? § If no `second attempt' is submitted (because the student did not attend class in person on Friday), the grade for the first attempt will count for 5% of the final course grade.
o What if the Second Attempt is submitted late? § Submissions received < 1 hr late will be penalized by 5%. Submissions received between 1 and 24 hrs late will be penalized by 25%. Submissions received between 24 - 48 hrs late will be penalized by 50%. Submissions received between 48 - 72 hrs late will be penalized by 75%. No submissions will be accepted after 72 hrs past the deadline.
o Which attempt will be graded, and which grade will be kept? § If both a first and second attempt are submitted, only the second attempt will be graded. Keep in mind that students are able to go over their answers in groups and ask for TA/Instructor support for the second attempt. We have never had a case where a student has scored better on the first, as compared to the second, attempt. Therefore, we do not anticipate this general policy will cause any issues.
5

ECOL3500, GENERAL ECOLOGY Fall 2022
Exams - 3 mid-term exams, and a partially-cumulative final exam o Mid-term and final exams will be taken in-person, in 201 Ecology. o Exams will be a combination of multiple choice, fill in the blank and short answer. o Questions will be written to assess your ability to synthesize material presented in class, including any videos and assigned readings. Like most biology-related courses, exams in this class will test you beyond memorization of terms. We want to ensure that you understand ecological principles and processes. Therefore, exams will have scenarios which you have never specifically learned about, but should be able to reason through based on the information we discussed in class. o The partially-cumulative final exam will be: 55% from Unit 4, 15% from Unit 3, 15% from Unit 2, 15% from Unit 1.
- Exam keys will not be released. After exams have been graded, the TA and Undergraduate TAs will send out an email with time(s) for `post-exam review sessions'. If students attend these review sessions, or `student hours' in person, they can review their exams and ask clarifying questions. Exams CANNOT BE TAKEN HOME, and must be returned to the TA or instructor before students leave the room.
- Make-up Exams: Make-up exams will be allowed only in extreme cases and only if there is a well-documented absence due to acute illness, jury duty, and other exceptional circumstances that is clearly beyond your control. Exam absences must be documented in advance of the exam day, with the exception of emergencies that can be documented up to 24-hr after the exam time. After proper documentation is submitted, the instructor will determine how to proceed.
What other things do I need to know about ECOL3500 before we start?
Communication: We will use eLC and email to communicate class announcements. We do our best to respond to emails within 24 hours during the week. Response times will be longer on the weekends, to promote our own work-life balance. Please email again if you haven't heard back.
Use Student Hours: We encourage you to ask questions about course material, assignments, or just life. It's a great way for us to get to know each other better (which is one of the goals here!)
Religious Observances: The University of Georgia recognizes students' rights to engage in religious practice. If you will miss class to observe religious activities, please contact me prior to the observance and make arrangements to complete missing assignments or assessments.
Accommodations for Students with Disabilities: If you require a disability-required accommodation, it is essential that you register with the Disability Resource Center (Clark Howell Hall; https://drc.uga.edu; 706-542-8719 [voice]; 706-542-8778 [TTY]) and notify us of your eligibility for reasonable accommodations. We can then plan how best to coordinate your accommodations. Please note that accommodations cannot be provided retroactively.
6

ECOL3500, GENERAL ECOLOGY Fall 2022
University Honor Code & Academic Honesty: As a University of Georgia student, you have agreed to abide by the UGA academic honesty policy. UGA Student Honor code: "I will be academically honest in all of my academic work and will not tolerate academic dishonesty of others". A Culture of Honesty, the University's policy and procedures for handling cases of suspected dishonesty, can be found at https://honesty.uga.edu/
You are responsible for informing yourself about the university's standards before performing any academic work. Lack of knowledge of the academic honesty policy is not a reasonable explanation for a violation. Please ask if you have questions related to course assignments and the academic honesty policy. Any form of possible academic dishonesty will be reported to the UGA Office of the Vice President for Instruction.
FERPA Notice: The Federal Family Educational Rights and Privacy Act (FERPA) grants students certain information privacy rights. To comply with FERPA, all communication that refers to individual students must be through a secure medium (UGAMail or eLC) or in person. Instructors are not allowed to respond to messages that refer to individual students or student progress in the course through non-UGA accounts, phone calls, or other types of electronic media. For details, please visit https://apps.reg.uga.edu/FERPA.
What other UGA resources are available to me, outside of ECOL3500?
Academic Coaching: The Division of Academic Enhancement at UGA provides Academic Coaches provides assistance with time management, test and performance anxiety, notetaking, motivation, text comprehension, test preparation, and other barriers to success at UGA.
Peer Tutoring: The Division of Academic Enhancement at UGA provides free undergraduate Peer Tutors for ECOL3500. All currently enrolled UGA undergrad students can meet with a Peer Tutor who has successfully completed the course being tutored to discuss class content, ask questions, and share study tips and resources. Tutoring is free and available in the form of oneon-one appointments and study pods both in-person at locations across campus and online via Zoom.
Syllabus Disclaimer The course syllabus is a general plan for the course; deviations may be necessary.
7

