Ecology Lab- Honors (ECOL 3505L)

Fall 2021

CONTACTS

Lab Teaching Assistants (TAs)

Your TAs are your primary lab contacts. Check the Lab Sections table to find your lab's TAs!

Name

Email

Amy B.

amy.briggs@uga.edu

Doreen C.

doreen.chaussadas@uga.edu

Jeff B.

beauvais@uga.edu

Maria Luisa M.-T. maria.mullerthe25@uga.edu

Matt T.

matthew.tatz@uga.edu

Megan H.

megan.hopson@uga.edu

Supraja R.

supraja.rajagopal@uga.edu

Jump to (click link)  Topical Outline  Lab Format & COVID safety  Attendance & Make-Up Policy  Lab Assignments & Grading  University policies & resources

Lab Coordinator: Dr. Kait Farrell Email: kfarrell@uga.edu Meetings by appointment: e-mail to schedule
COURSE DESCRIPTION
Ecology Lab (ECOL 3505L) builds on lecture themes of population structure and dynamics, community organization and classification, and ecosystem nutrient and energy flows.
COURSE OBJECTIVES
This lab will help you improve your ability to make observations, develop your scientific writing, and provide practice formulating hypotheses about how and why things occur in nature and testing those hypotheses using data. This course uses inquiry-based learning, which seeks to provide a realistic experience conducting ecological research.
Specifically, this course is designed to provide you with experience in the following:  Reinforcing ecological principles learned in lecture through hands-on experiences  Communicating scientific knowledge and findings through writing  Designing and implementing ecological studies and data analyses  Experiencing the benefits of collaboration and teamwork in science
Please see the Topical Outline for a list of topics this lab will cover.
Course Details  Co-requisite: ECOL 3505 (Ecology lecture- Honors)  Required resources: None  Format: In-person laboratory  Location: Science Learning Center room 302
Key Dates  Wed. Aug. 18: Classes begin (1st lab: week of Aug. 23-27)  Tues. Aug. 24: Add/Drop ends  Mon. Oct. 25: Withdrawal deadline

ECOL 3505L, Fall 2021

1

COURSE POLICIES
Lab Format COVID Safety Following UGA guidelines, our labs will be held in-person and at full capacity. There is not an online/remote option for this lab.
 Vaccination against COVID-19 is strongly recommended. If you are not yet vaccinated, you can schedule an appointment for a free COVID-19 vaccine at the University Health Center through the UHC Patient Portal.
 UGA also strongly encourages everyone to wear an appropriate face mask while inside campus buildings, regardless of vaccination status. We hope you will wear a mask when inside our lab room.
 Please see the "UGA COVID Information" document on eLC for the latest university-wide guidance about COVID policies and procedures.
Labs will meet in the Science Learning Center (SLC) room 302 unless otherwise announced.
Preparation & Participation You should come to lab prepared to participate and actively engage in lab activities. Preparing for lab includes previewing the week's lab materials on eLC, completing any pre-lab quizzes, and brainstorming ideas and questions related to the lab topic to share with your classmates.
To earn full participation points during lab each week, you should arrive to lab on time and participate in lab activities. Arriving late, leaving lab early without permission, not participating in lab activities and/or distracting from the learning environment are grounds for loss of partial or full participation points each week.
Collaborative work Group work will be a part of some lab activities. We encourage you to work with your classmates when completing such work. However, you must complete all assignments individually (i.e., showing independent thought and using your own words) unless specifically otherwise indicated in the instructions. If you ever have a question about whether you have crossed the fine line between group and independent work, ask your TA before you submit the assignment.
In the sciences, all co-authors are responsible for the accuracy and originality of group work. Similarly, your name on a group assignment implies that you take responsibility for the accuracy and originality of the entire assignment (and for any academic dishonesty that may have been involved). Group members should do their best to contribute equally to group assignments. Non-participation in group work could result in a lowered grade on group assignments. If you are experiencing problems with one or more group members, please contact your TA so that can help your team resolve any conflicts.
Attendance & Make-Up Policy Attendance in-person during lab is required each week. Since labs only meet once per week, missing even one session means you have missed a substantial amount of course material. DO NOT schedule other appointments or activities that overlap with your lab section.
If you have TWO unexcused absences or THREE total (excused + unexcused) absences during the semester, you will receive an "F" in the lab due to incompletion of the course. If you find yourself in a situation whereby you anticipate having excessive absences, please contact the Lab Coordinator as soon as possible to discuss potential solutions.

ECOL 3505L, Fall 2021

2

Excused Absences Students with an excused absence are eligible to complete a make-up activity for credit. Excused absences that are made up still count toward your total lab absences for the semester. Confirmation of excused absences may require written/verifiable documentation that covers the specific date and time of your regularly scheduled lab. Excused absences include personal illness/hospitalization (including COVID quarantine/isolation), family emergency, religious holidays, or competing in a UGA varsity athletic event. Note that providing false statements regarding an absence is a violation of the Academic Honesty Policy.
If you are absent from your in-person lab with a valid excuse, you must submit a make-up request form within 48 hours of your absence to be eligible for a make-up activity. The make-up request form is linked from the lab eLC homepage. Failure to submit a make-up request form within 48 hours of your missed lab will count as an unexcused absence.
Unexcused Absences Unexcused absences include (but may not be limited to) work scheduling conflicts, sorority/fraternity/ club events, advising appointments, athletics practices, being out of town/on vacation, oversleeping/ alarm not going off, or that you just did not feel like coming to lab or forgot your lab was meeting.
Unexcused absences are not eligible for make-up activities. As a result, you will earn 0 points for the assignment associated with the lab you missed. You also will not earn participation points for that lab.
Lab Assignments & Grading You can earn up to 300 points in lab. The planned breakdown of points is as follows:
 Ecology research project (group + individual assignments): 95 points o Group assignments: 25 points o Individual assignments: 70 points
 Lab assignments & quizzes: 183 points  Participation & engagement: 22 points
A list of assignments with point values and due dates is posted on eLC and embedded in the eLC calendar.
Due Dates & Late Work Due dates for all graded activities are listed on eLC; quizzes and assignments must be submitted through eLC by the due date. Late assignment submissions will incur a 10% per day penalty after the due date; quizzes are not eligible for late submission. Assignments will not be accepted for credit more than 5 calendar days after the due date and will receive a grade of zero. If you have an emergency that causes you to miss a due date, please contact your TA and the lab coordinator as soon as possible after the due date.
All assignments must be submitted as a Word document (.docx) or PDF file (.pdf) unless otherwise specified in the assignment guidelines. It is your responsibility to review uploaded assignment files for accuracy and format. Submitted files that are blank, corrupted, or in an unsupported format (e.g., not PDF or .docx) will not be graded. Such assignments can be resubmitted but will be subject to late penalties.
Grade Disputes If you have a question or complaint about a grade on an assignment, you must bring it to your TA's attention by submitting a grade dispute form (linked on eLC), which includes a written, specific explanation as to why you disagree with the grade, within 3 calendar days of the grade being posted to eLC.

ECOL 3505L, Fall 2021

3

Final Grades Your lab grade constitutes 30% of your overall course (ECOL 3505) grade. Final lab grades will be calculated as your total points earned divided by total points possible. The resulting percentage will be rounded to two decimals and reported to Dr. Injaian for inclusion in your overall course grade.
Access to Course Information, Syllabus, & Policies All course information including a copy of the syllabus, assignment due dates, and policy information can be found on eLC. You are welcome to print off materials for completing the lab assignments. Any changes to the syllabus or lab schedule will be posted to eLC. Announcements about the lab will be posted to eLC, sent through eLC mail, and/or sent through UGA email. You are responsible for checking eLC and your UGA email on a regular basis.
UNIVERSITY POLICIES & RESOURCES
University Honor Code & Academic Honesty As a University of Georgia student, you have agreed to abide by the UGA academic honesty policy, "A Culture of Honesty", and the Student Honor Code ("I will be academically honest in all of my academic work and will not tolerate academic dishonesty of others."). All academic work must meet the standards described in the Academic Honesty Policy.
You are responsible for informing yourself about the university's standards before performing any academic work. Lack of knowledge of the academic honesty policy is not a reasonable explanation for a violation. All instances of suspected or potential academic dishonesty, including plagiarizing, lying, cheating, falsifying data, obtaining unauthorized assistance, stealing, or other forms of academic dishonesty detailed as Prohibited Conduct in the Academic Honesty Policy, will be reported to the UGA Office of the Vice President for Instruction. Please ask before submitting your assignment if you ever have questions related to course assignments and the academic honesty policy.
DRC Accommodations If you are eligible for course accommodations, it is essential that you register with the Disability Resource Center (Clark Howell Hall; https://drc.uga.edu; 706-542-8719 [voice]; 706-542-8778 [TTY]). You should also make an appointment to speak with your TA or the Lab Coordinator before the semester begins, or as soon as possible thereafter, to ensure we are aware of your accommodations. Please note that accommodations cannot be applied retroactively.
Campus Mental Health and Wellness Resources We are living through challenging times. The resources below are available through UGA to help you navigate struggles you may be experiencing in your academic and/or personal life:
 If you or someone you know needs assistance, you are encouraged to contact Student Care and Outreach in the Division of Student Affairs (706-542-7774 or https://sco.uga.edu). They will help you navigate difficult circumstances by connecting you with the appropriate resources or services.
 UGA has several resources for a student seeking crisis support (https://www.uhs.uga.edu/info/emergencies) or mental health services (https://www.uhs.uga.edu/bewelluga/mental-health).
 If you need help managing stress anxiety, relationships, etc., please visit BeWellUGA (https://www.uhs.uga.edu/bewelluga/bewelluga) for a list of FREE workshops, classes, mentoring, and health coaching led by licensed clinicians and health educators in the University Health Center.
 If you need assistance with time management, test and performance anxiety, note-taking, motivation, text comprehension, test preparation, and other barriers to academic success at UGA, contact Academic Coaching (https://dae.uga.edu/services/academic-coaching).

ECOL 3505L, Fall 2021

4

 Additional resources can be accessed through the UGA App.
FERPA Notice The Federal Family Educational Rights and Privacy Act (FERPA) grants students certain information privacy rights. To comply with FERPA, all communication that refers to individual students must be through a secure medium (UGAMail or eLC) or in person. Instructors are not allowed to respond to messages that refer to individual students or student progress in the course through non-UGA accounts, phone calls, or other types of electronic media. For details, please visit https://apps.reg.uga.edu/FERPA.
Syllabus Disclaimer The course syllabus is a general plan for the course; deviations announced to the class by the instructor may be necessary. Any changes will be posted to eLC.
Lab Sections

CRN (3505L) 10859 10852 10867 10878 10861 10864 10855 10869 10882 10871 46380

Day Mon Tue Tue Tue Wed Wed Thu Thu Thu Fri Fri

Time 8:00 - 10:45 am 8:00 - 10:45 am 11:10 am - 1:55 pm 2:20 - 5:05 pm 8:00 - 10:45 am 11:30 am - 2:15 pm 8:00 - 10:45 am 11:10 am - 1:55 pm 2:20 - 5:05 pm 8:00 - 10:45 am 11:30 am - 2:15 pm

TAs

Amy

Supraja

Amy

Supraja

Maria Luisa Supraja

Amy

Maria Luisa

Matt

Doreen

Maria Luisa Doreen

Matt

Jeff

Matt

Jeff

Megan

Doreen

Megan

--

Megan

Jeff

Topical Outline
Labs will include an exploration of the following topics. Some topics span multiple lab sessions. See the Course Schedule on eLC for details about dates and associated assignments.

 Experimental design  Scientific writing & communication  Data analysis & interpretation  Organism adaptations  Population ecology & conservation

 Trophic dynamics  Disease ecology  Forest ecology  Stream ecology  Ecological forecasting

ECOL 3505L, Fall 2021

5

