MARS 3550: Life In Fluids

Instructor: E-mail: Web:
Office Hours: Office:
Semester: Class Times:
Classroom:

Adrian B. Burd
adrianb@uga.edu marsci.uga.edu/directory/people/adrian-burd
By appointment or drop by 291A Marine Sciences Building Fall semester, odd years Tuesday & Thursday 11:10 -12:25 Marine Sciences, 239

Course Description
Organisms live out their lives surrounded by water or air, and the nature of those fluids affect the way organisms move, eat, find food, sense their surroundings, and are able to regulate internal properties such as their temperature. In this course we will address questions such as, how does the fluid environment affect the way a bacteria locates food? What allows an albatross to circumnavigate the globe in under 50 days and yet use only a small amount of energy to do so? How does a Basiliscus run on water? How does having a wet nose help the kangaroo rat keep hydrated? Why do some electric fish swim in unusual ways?
Course Learning Objectives
After completing this course students will be able to identify the features of the fluid environment that affect a given feature of an organism's behavior, and describe both qualitatively and quantitatively how this happens. Students will also be able to contrast the effect that different types of fluid environment have on organism movement and life style.
Topical Outline
The following contains a schedule of topics that we will cover in the course. Please note that this schedule is preliminary, and details may change throughout the semester.
The Fluid Environment Understanding the properties of fluids that are important for organisms. A brief introduction into the motion of fluids and how they affect organisms.
Fluid Density the effects of buoyancy (e.g. swim bladders in fish) and density on locomotion (e.g. jet propulsion in squids), lift and drag (e.g. soaring and porpoising), the energy requirements of different ways of moving in a fluid.
1

Fluid Viscosity Drag and flagella, the problems moving about when you are small, how to stick to something (e.g. limpets sticking to a rock).
Diffusion Using diffusion to find and obtain food (e.g. chemotaxis), breathing by diffusion (e.g. insect trachea, bird eggs), finding a partner.
Boundary Layers Encountering one another in a turbulent environment, hiding from predators, listening and smelling your environment (how do fish smell?), feeding using the boundary layer (e.g. suspension feeding in copepods).
Heat Heat from metabolism (the temperature of bees in flight), losing heat by breathing, heat exchangers (how do penguins keep warm without shoes and socks?), evaporation (the advantage of having a cold nose).
Sound How does sound move in air and water? How small an object can you detect by sound? Using sound (dolphins, bats, and owls), the evolution of hearing structures (whale and dolphin evolution).
Light Using light for food (photosynthesis in air and water), the art and science of being invisible, seeing underwater.
Surface Tension Capillarity (the dangers of getting wet), walking on water.
Electricity Electricity in air and water (do electric eels shock themselves?), sensing your prey's electric field (how sharks use electricity).
Waves How is a duck like a boat? How do ocean waves keep the albatross aloft?
Textbooks & Readings
There are no required textbooks for this course, all required information will be conveyed through the lectures and online readings. However, the course will stick most closely to the book by Mark Denny (listed below). I will also draw on the other books listed below from time to time during the course.
 Air and Water: The Biology and Physics of Life's Media by Mark Denny (Princeton University Press, ISB 0-691-08734-2).
 Dynamics of Dinosaurs and Other Extinct Giants by R. McNeill Alexander (Columbia University Press, ISB 0-231-06666-X).
 Glimpses of Creatures in their Physical Worlds by Steven Vogel (Princeton University Press, ISB 978-0-691-13807-7).
 Living at Micro Scale: The Unexpected Physics of Being Small by David B. Dusenbery (Harvard University Press, ISB 978-0-674-03116-6)
2

There will be regularly posted readings on ELC. When they are assigned, these should be read before the next class.
Coursework
There will be no exams for this course. Instead, there will be a mixture of in-class and out-of-class assignments that will include simple calculations, essay summaries, group work, and individual projects. The individual project will form a major part of the coursework, and students will give both a presentation on their project as well as hand in a written report which will make up the final writing assignment (see below).
This is course is an officially designated Writing Intensive course. This means that throughout the course there will be three of the course assignments will be specifically writing assignments. Each writing assignment will occur in multiple stages, each with ample opportunity for feedback from the instructor or WIP-TA.

Course Grading

The breakdown of the course grades into individual categories will be: Homework assignments (30%), in-class work (30%, including class participation), individual project (40% divided into 10% for the presentation and 30% for the report). A final letter grade will be posted for the course. The correspondence between percentages and letter grades is given below The interpretation of

A : 93 - 100% A-: 90 - 93%

B+: 87 - 90% B : 83 - 87% B- : 80 - 83%

C+: 77 - 80% C : 70 - 77 % C- : 65 - 70%

D: 60 - 65% F : 59% and below

Table 1: Table of the correspondence between final letter grades and total percentages.

the major letter grades is:
A This grade is used to recognize work that is excellent and of the highest calibre and that stands out from that of other students. Students who achieve this grade have demonstrated a mastery of the content of the course, as well as shown excellence in the presentation and written portions of the course.
B This letter grade is used to signify competent work. A student who achieves this grade has demonstrated proficient understanding of the concepts and content of the course sufficient for effective use of these concepts and techniques.
C This letter grade signifies adequate work. A student who has achieved this grade has demonstrated a general understanding of the concepts covered in the course but with significant flaws in either their understanding or execution of techniques.
D This letter grade indicates that the work is inadequate, and that the student has not demonstrated the requisite skills and understanding to use these techniques.
3

F This letter grade signifies work that is unacceptable.

Special Accommodations
If you need special accommodations for classwork or other class activities because of a disability, please make an appointment to see the instructor as soon as possible or before the end of the first full week of classes.
Important Dates

Wednesday, August 18, 2021 Thursday, August 19, 2021 August 18 - August 21 Monday, October 25, 2021 November 24 - 26, 2021 Thursday, December 2, 2021

First day of classes First class of the course Drop-add for courses Withdrawl deadline Thanksgiving (no classes) Last class of the course

Table 2: A table of important dates for the Fall 2021 semester.

Academic Honesty
As a University of Georgia student, you have agreed to abide by the University's academic honesty policy, "A Culture of Honesty," and the Student Honor Code. All academic work must meet the standards described in "A Culture of Honesty" found at:
https://ovpi.uga.edu/academic-honesty/academic-honesty-policy
Lack of knowledge of the academic honesty policy is not a reasonable explanation for a violation. Questions related to course assignments and the academic honesty policy should be directed to the instructor.
All students are expected to hand in work that is their own -- discussion of homework assignments among students is permitted (and encouraged), but the work you hand in must be your own. Any student found cheating or plagiarizing will be disciplined according to the University's rules and policies. Examples of plagiarism include, but are not restricted to: copying someone else's words, calculations, graphics, or presentation without attribution.
Mental Health & Wellness
Mental Health and Wellness Resources:
 If you or someone you know needs assistance, you are encouraged to contact Student Care and Outreach in the Division of Student Affairs at 706-542-7774 or visit https:// sco.uga.edu/. They will help you navigate any difficult circumstances you may be facing by connecting you with the appropriate resources or services.
4

 UGA has several resources for a student seeking mental health services (https://www. uhs.uga.edu/bewelluga/bewelluga) or crisis support (https://www.uhs.uga.edu/info/ emergencies).
 If you need help managing stress anxiety, relationships, etc., please visit BeWellUGA (https: //www.uhs.uga.edu/bewelluga/bewelluga) for a list of FREE workshops, classes, mentoring, and health coaching led by licensed clinicians and health educators in the University Health Center.
 Additional resources can be accessed through the UGA App. The course syllabus is a general plan for the course; deviations announced to the class by the
instructor may be necessary.
5

