Premedical Seminar BIOL 2900: Clinical Applications of Basic Sciences BIOL 3990: Selected Topics from the Practice of Medicine

Offered each Fall and Spring Semester (1 credit hour)

Lecture:

Designated Tuesdays, 3:30-4:45 p.m. (Ten 75-minute sessions) UGA College of Pharmacy South Building, Room PS-101 (new wing)

UGA Faculty: * R. Alan Langford, M.D., (Previous Director of Premedical Studies (1997-2013), now faculty in Pharmacy, Microbiology & Biology, and adjunct in Public Health & Medicine). (Prior clinical practice in dermatology, internal medicine, &
military primary care including interest in Infectious Diseases) * David Eisner, M.D. (Cell Biology/Biology) (Recent Interim Director of Premedical
Studies) (Prior clinical practice in anesthesiology and management of surgical patients)

Topics are selected for each term at the first class session with input from students registered for the class. The sessions are open to UGA students not enrolled, as these sessions are also used as the UGA "Premed Forum." Topics in the past have included the history of the UGA Premedical Office, internship/residency/fellowship training for physicians in specialties and subspecialties, licensing and hospital privilege issues, medical malpractice/tort reform, Alzheimer's disease, the medically underinsured populace in the U.S., human stem cells/cloning, missions of specific medical schools, obesity as a health risk, osteopathic medicine, alternative medicine, selected diseases, bio-
medical ethics, care of elderly patients, immunizations/vaccinations for selected infectious diseases, military medicine, and others. Suggestions from participants for topics are welcomed. The topics should generate fervent discussion and cordial 'debate' by students with faculty, visitors, and intermittent guest speakers.

Homework and grading policy: BIOL 2900 students turn in TEN required written short papers (1 page, double-spaced, reasonable' font ' -not to exceed # 12- with smaller font, if needed, to limit to one page. Heading must be limited to 2 single spaced lines) on each weekly topic (with session #) making comments in the first paragraph on an item with which agreed (and why?) and another item (second paragraph) with which disagreement exists (and why?). (Due the next class session @ beginning of class or 7 days after last session). Each homework paper is graded as `pass or fail'.

BIOL 3990 students have the same requirement as the BIOL 2900 students, PLUS finding & reading one article by an expert on the topic discussed who agrees with the enrolled student's primary opinion & submitting a 'hard copy' of the article's 1st page (including its source) with the written homework. Each homework for BIOL 2900 is placed in the green box @ the front of the classroom. BIOL 3900 in the other green box in the back of the classroom. By each box, each student will sign the roll to document class attendance for each session.

The class is not intended to be difficult. The faculty do not wish these assignments to detract from a student's studies in her/his main classes. A dependable interested student should find the seminar experience to be stimulating and worthwhile in preparing to apply one day to medical or similar schools. Of course, opinions generated by a student that differ from the faculty's opinion result in no penalty. Many topics selected will generate questions not easily answered.

Class attendance and participation for the ENTIRE time of each session is required for each weekly session. Anyone found using electronic devices for other than legitimate class purposes (excepting emergencies), as taking notes or searching the Internet regarding an issue raised in class, will be counted absent/unexcused. (No social media, surfing the Internet, texting, etc.)
Requests for excusing an absence must be presented by e-mail to Dr. Langford (BIOL 2900, alangfor@uga.edu) or Dr. Eisner (BIOL 3990, deisner@uga.edu) in a timely and written fashion, before class (unless not possible). In the event that Dr. Eisner fully retires, these e-mails should be sent to Dr. Langford. If absence is excused, then a `make-up' homework must be generated by attending another biolife/health/disease seminar on campus (usually one with a guest speaker). (check UGA campus calendar, departmental websites, campus newpaper, etc.) during the semester and summarizing the presentation in writing. These `make-up' homeworks are due by NOON two weeks after last class session (#10) is held.
To attend & document 10 sessions and turn in 10 satisfactory homework assignments generates 20 `check-marks'. 20 of these results in an `A'. Each lacking checkmark results in the loss of a FULL letter grade (19 checkmarks -- `B'). Each late homework -- loss of one-third of a letter Grade (`A' - `A-/A minus'). Even late homeworks not received before Reading Day just before final exams are not counted as received.

