Entomology 4000/6000 General Entomology v. 2022
Lecture T,R 11:10 -12:25PM Lab F 11:30- 1:30 PM Instructor: Dr. Kerry Oliver, Professor of Entomology 505 Biological Sciences, 542-2311, kmoliver@uga.edu
Teaching Assistant: Roy Kucuk. Roy.Kucuk@uga.edu office: 503 Biological Sciences
Prerequisites: BIOL 1107-1107L and BIOL 1108-1108L
Course objectives. The goal of the course is to provide an overview of the biology of insects. We want you to become familiar with the insects that annoy you, eat your food, and transmit diseases. More importantly, we want you to gain an appreciation of the incredible diversity of the insect world and recognize the many and often less obvious ways that insects benefit you.
Office hours. Office hours are by appointment (arrange by email). I will make every effort to meet with you in a timely fashion. My office is 505 Biological Sciences (one floor up). Check there first, but I may be across the hall in my laboratory (room 504).
Text and required readings. There is no required text book for the course. An optional text The Insects: an outline of entomology 5thEdition (Gullen & Cranston, 2014) is recommended for those wanting supplemental reading material. Class notes may be supplemented with handouts, available on ELC.
Laboratory. The main purpose of the laboratory is to teach you how to recognize the major orders and families of insects. Developing some basic taxonomic knowledge is essential to appreciating the wonderful diversity and biology of insects. It also is important that you be able to recognize key characteristics of the insect body plan and how it compares and contrasts to other major animal groups like vertebrates.
Grading. Getting and giving grades is rough on both students and instructors. Unfortunately, it is the nature of the system that grades must be given.
Grades will be based on the following items: 1. Lecture Exams (3) 2. Discussion sessions 3. Laboratory Exams (2) 4. Laboratory quizzes (most weeks) 5. Insect Collection
Lecture Exams. There will be three lecture exams, each worth 100 points. Exams will be given in class and will test your knowledge of the material presented during the lecture portion of the class. The first two lecture exams will be given during the semester while the third will serve as the final exam for the course (the final exam is not comprehensive).

Discussion. Since the class is 75 minutes, we will stop most days at about 50 minutes, take a short break, then commence with discussion. Discussion session will include informal conversations about current and past PPT lectures, and will involve some more formal discussion of short reading assignments that are assigned in advance. More details will be provided in class regarding the content and structure of these sessions. The purpose of paper discussions is to acquaint you with the scientific literature or key topics relevant to this course as well as to discuss important impacts that insects have on you or society. You will be often be required to complete short assignments to direct learning and foster discussion.

Make-Up Exams. Make-up exams are offered only in the cases of genuine emergency, illness or hardship, which must be supported with written documentation.

Laboratory Exams. There will be two laboratory exams worth 50 points each. These exams will test your knowledge of the material presented in the laboratory during the course of the semester.

Laboratory Quizzes. Weekly quizzes keep you up-to-date

Insect Collection. You will be required to make an insect collection that will be turned in for grading at the end of the semester. This collection will be worth a total of 100 points. Details on collection requirements and grading will be presented in laboratory.

Academic Honesty: Please see UGA's policy on academic honest at http://www.uga.edu/honesty/

Grading Policies

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Lecture Exam 1

100

Lecture Exam 2

100

Lecture Final (Exam 3) 100

Discussion

100

Laboratory Exam 1

50

Laboratory Exam 2

50

Insect Collection

100

Lab worksheets

100

TOTAL

700

Those taking the course at the 6000 level will have additional requirements for the insect collection and discussion sessions. More details will be provided in lecture and lab.

CORONAVIRUS INFORMATION FOR STUDENTS FOR FALL 2021 CLASSES
Vaccines are strongly recommended. Face coverings and social distancing are also recommended for all individuals while inside campus facilities.
How can I obtain the COVID-19 vaccine? University Health Center is scheduling appointments for students through the UHC Patient Portal (https://patientportal.uhs.uga.edu/login_dualauthentication.aspx). Learn more here - https://www.uhs.uga.edu/healthtopics/covid-vaccine.
What do I do if I have COVID-19 symptoms? Students showing COVID-19 symptoms should self-isolate and schedule an appointment with the University Health Center by calling 706-542-1162 (Monday-Friday, 8 a.m.-5p.m.). Please DO NOT walk-in. For emergencies and after-hours care, see, https://www.uhs.uga.edu/info/emergencies.
What do I do if I test positive for COVID-19? If you test positive for COVID-19 at any time, you are required to report it through the DawgCheck Test Reporting Survey. We encourage you to stay at home if you become ill or until you have excluded COVID-19 as the cause of your symptoms. UGA adheres to current Georgia Department of Public Health (DPH) quarantine and isolation guidance and requires that it be followed. Follow the instructions provided to you when you report your positive test result in DawgCheck.
Guidelines for COVID-19 Quarantine Period
If you test positive for Covid-19:
 You must report a positive COVID-19 test in Dawgcheck (https://dawgcheck.uga.edu)  Stay home for 5 days  If you have no symptoms or your symptoms are resolving after 5 days, you can leave
your house  Continue to wear a mask around others for 5 additional days  If you have a fever, continue to stay home until your fever resolves

If you were exposed to someone with COVID-19 AND have received a booster or completed the primary series of Pfizer or Moderna within the last 6 months, or completed Johnson and Johnson within the last 2 months:
 Wear a mask around others for 10 days  Test on day 5, if possible  Stay home if you develop any symptoms
If you were exposed to someone with COVID-19 AND you are unvaccinated, completed the primary series of Pfizer or Moderna over 6 months ago and are not boosted, or completed Johnson and Johnson over two months ago and are not boosted:
 Stay home for 5 days, then wear a mask around others for an additional 5 days  Test on day 5, if possible  Stay home if you develop any symptoms
Monitoring conditions:
Note that the guidance referenced in this syllabus is subject to change based on recommendations from the Georgia Department of Public Health, the University System of Georgia, or the Governor's Office or. For the latest on UGA policy, you can visit coronavirus.uga.edu.

