COURSE SYLLABUS
MAMMALOGY WILD 4050/6050
Fall 2022
Instructor
Dr. Steven Castleberry Office: Forestry and Natural Resources 3-321 E-mail: scastle@uga.edu Office hours: Drop in or by appointment
Teaching Assistant
Santiago Perea Office: Forestry and Natural Resources 4-427 E-mail: sperea@uga.edu Office hours: By appointment
Lecture and Lab Meeting Times
Lecture: Monday, Wednesday, Friday 11:30 - 12:20 (1-306) Lab: Tuesday 1:50 - 4:50 (1-101)
Course Description and Objectives
This course is a detailed study of mammals with an emphasis on diversity, distribution, life history, behavior, ecology, and field techniques. Laboratory emphasis is on the identification, taxonomy, and natural history of southeastern mammals. By the end of this course you will be able to:
1. Describe mammalian characteristics and the evolutionary and biogeographic history of mammalian taxa.
2. Recognize mammalian orders and families and summarize the anatomical, morphological, behavioral, and ecological features that characterize each.
3. Identify, classify, and describe the natural history of mammals in the southeastern United States.
4. Apply knowledge of mammal natural history to research and management.
5. Demonstrate techniques used in mammal field studies, including capture, marking, and specimen preservation.
Attendance and Make-up Policy You are expected to attend every lecture and lab in-person. If you are absent or late, you will only be able to make up work (e.g., exams, quizzes, in-class exercises, etc.) if you have a documented excuse.
Syllabus Disclaimer
The course syllabus is a general plan for the course; deviations announced to the class by the instructor may be necessary.

Lecture Requirements
Lecture Exams-There will be three exams covering material presented in lecture. An optional cumulative final exam will be given on Friday, December 9 from 12:00-3:00 pm. If you choose to take the final exam, I will substitute that score for your lowest lecture exam score in calculating your overall lecture average. Exams will be given on eLC. You must be present in the classroom to take exams. Make-up lecture exams will only be given if you have a documented excuse.
Quizzes and Assignments-Quizzes and assignments will be given throughout the semester. Quizzes will only be available to students who are in class and can only be made up if you have documented excuse.
Project-You are required to complete a semester-long project related to mammalogy. Preapproved project ideas include a species literature review, image collection, video documentary, research project, or outreach project. You have discretion to choose another type of project with my approval. A detailed guide to completing the project is available on eLC.

Lab Requirements

Lab Exams-Three exams will be given covering material presented during labs. Because of the time required to prepare lab exams, make-up exams will be considered only if you have a serious, well-documented excuse.

Quizzes and Assignments-Quizzes will be given at the beginning of some labs (see lab schedule below). Assignments will be given throughout the semester and will be due either at the end of lab or a later date.

Video Quizzes-Videos covering the species on the species lists are posted on eLC. Each week you will be required to watch the videos and take the quiz at the end. The deadline for taking quizzes is the beginning of lab the following week.

Grading

Lecture

Lecture exam 1

20%

Lecture exam 2

20%

Lecture exam 3

20%

Quizzes and assignments

20%

Project

20%

Lab

Lab exam 1

20%

Lab exam 2

20%

Lab exam 3

20%

Weekly quizzes and assignments 30%

Video quizzes

10%

The plus/minus grading system will be used, according to UGA policy, and assigned following this plus/minus grading scale: A = 93-100, A- = 90-92.9, B+ = 87-89.9, B = 8386.9, B- = 80-82.9, C+ = 77-79.9, C = 73-76.9, C-= 70-72.9, D = 60-69.9, F = <60
Extra Requirement for Students Enrolled in WILD 6050
Students enrolled in the graduate section (WILD 6050) will be required to deliver a lecture to the class on a topic relating to the study of mammals. An annotated bibliography of the sources used to create the lecture (minimum of 10 sources) will be due the day of the lecture. You should speak to me about potential lecture topics.

Required Materials
You are required to have a laptop (or other suitable device) for use in lecture and lab. Exams will be given using the Quizzes function in eLC and will require that you use Respondus Lock-down Browser. Before each exam, be sure that you have installed the latest updates and that it is working correctly.
Optional Materials
Textbook: Feldhamer, G.A., J.F. Merritt, C. Krajewski., J.L. Rachlow, and K.M. Stewart. 2020. Mammalogy: Adaptation, Diversity, Ecology. Fifth edition. Johns Hopkins University Press, Baltimore, Maryland (ISBN 9781421436524)
Field Trip
We will be taking a 3-day trip to The Jones Center at Ichauway in southwest Georgia November 17-19 (Thursday to Saturday). Activities may include trapping for mesomammals, small mammals, fossorial mammals, bats, and assisting graduate students in various mammal-related projects. Attendance is not required, but the field trip is an opportunity to apply what you have learned in lecture and lab. You should begin making the necessary arrangements if you plan to attend. The cost for the trip is $50.00 which includes transportation, food, and lodging. The last date to sign up and pay is November 1. The trip will be canceled if at least half the class has not paid by the deadline.
University Honor Code and Academic Honesty
As a University of Georgia student, you have agreed to abide by the UGA academic honesty policy. UGA Student Honor code: "I will be academically honest in all of my academic work and will not tolerate academic dishonesty of others". A Culture of Honesty, the University's policy and procedures for handling cases of suspected dishonesty, can be found at https://honesty.uga.edu/.
You are responsible for informing yourself about the university's standards before performing any academic work. Lack of knowledge of the academic honesty policy is not a reasonable explanation for a violation. Please ask if you have questions related to course assignments and the academic honesty policy. Any form of possible academic dishonesty will be reported to the UGA Office of the Vice President for Instruction.
Mental Health and Wellness Resources
If you or someone you know needs assistance, you are encouraged to contact Student Care and Outreach in the Division of Student Affairs at 706-542-7774 or visit https://sco.uga.edu. They will help you navigate any difficult circumstances you may be facing by connecting you with the appropriate resources or services.
UGA has several resources for a student seeking mental health services (https://www.uhs.uga.edu/bewelluga/bewelluga) or crisis support (https://www.uhs.uga.edu/info/emergencies).
If you need help managing stress anxiety, relationships, etc., please visit BeWellUGA (https://www.uhs.uga.edu/bewelluga/bewelluga) for a list of free workshops, classes, mentoring, and health coaching led by licensed clinicians and health educators in the University Health Center.
Additional resources can be accessed through the UGA App.

Accommodations for Disabilities
If you require a disability-required accommodation, it is essential that you register with the Disability Resource Center (Clark Howell Hall; https://drc.uga.edu; 706-542-8719 [voice]; 706-542-8778 [TTY]) and notify me of your eligibility for reasonable accommodations. We can then plan how best to coordinate your accommodations. Please note that accommodations cannot be provided retroactively.
FERPA
The federal Family Educational Rights and Privacy Act (FERPA) grants student's certain information privacy rights. To comply with FERPA, all communication that refers to individual students must be through a secure medium (UGAMail or eLC) or in person. Instructors are not allowed to respond to messages that refer to individual students or student progress in the course through non-UGA accounts, phone calls, or other types of electronic media. For details, please visit https://apps.reg.uga.edu/FERPA.
Cell Phones and Laptops
As a courtesy to your classmates and instructor, turn off and put away cell phones before class. Laptops and tablets may be used during class for legitimate class purposes. Acceptable uses include taking notes, following along on presentation slides, as well as working on assigned in-class activities that require personal device use. Anyone using a laptop or tablet for non-legitimate purposes (e.g., email, social media, web surfing, playing games, etc.) will be asked to stop. Repeated offenses will result in revocation of the right to use devices during class except for required activities.
Lab Rules and Specimen Care The specimens that you will use in this course are fragile, and many are old and difficult or impossible to replace. Some are on loan from the research collection of the Georgia Museum of Natural History. All specimens are available for your benefit and mishandling will not be tolerated.
You will be shown the proper way to handle each group of specimens. Proper handling techniques should be used every time the specimens are examined. Cavalier handling of the specimens may result in the lowering of your course average. Repeated offenses may result in dismissal from the course.
Most specimens will be left in the lab for you to study at your convenience. You many not remove specimens from the lab under any circumstances. If inappropriate handling or damage to the specimens becomes frequent, this privilege will be revoked and you will only be allowed limited opportunities to view the specimens under supervision.
It is University policy that smoking or use of any tobacco product is forbidden anywhere on campus. It is class policy that food and drink are not permitted in the laboratory at any time.
Syllabus Disclaimer The course syllabus is a general plan for the course; deviations announced to the class by the instructor may be necessary.

Lecture Topics Topic I. Introduction
A. Introduction to mammalogy B. Mammal characteristics II. Evolution of Mammals A. Origins and evolutionary transformations B. Mesozoic mammals C. Mammalian radiations III. Mammal Distributions A. Biogeography concepts B. Faunal regions C. Origins of continental mammalian faunas IV. Diseases and Human Health Risks A. Terms and concepts B. Diseases with relevance to mammalogists V. Mammal Diversity A. Overview of mammal orders VI. Physiology and Environmental Adaptations A. Basic physiology B. Adaptations for cold C. Adaptations for heat D. Water regulation VII. Reproduction and Mating Systems A. Basic reproductive pattern B. Reproductive variations C. Mating systems VIII. Movement and Spatial Relations A. Home range and territoriality B. Dispersal C. Migration

Approximate # lectures 2 3
3
3 10-12
4
4
3

Lab Schedule
Lab Date 1 Aug 23 2 Aug 30 3 Sept 6 4 Sept 13 5 Sept 20 6 Sept 27 7 Oct 4 8 Oct 11 9 Oct 18 10 Oct 25 11 Nov 1 12 Nov 8 13 Nov 15 14 Nov 22 15 Nov 29

Topic(s) Lab introduction; Dichotomous keys; Moles and shrews Review; Quiz; Bats Bat field lab (approx. 6:00-11:00 PM; attendance required) Review; Quiz; Bat survey techniques Lab exam 1 Lagomorphs; Rodents I Review; Quiz; Rodents II Online Quiz; Small mammal trapping lab Lab exam 2; Specimen preparation demonstration Specimen preparation Carnivores Review; Quiz; Ungulates Review; Quiz; Opossums, armadillos, and marine mammals Lab exam 3 Georgia Museum of Natural History Mammal Collections

