PSYC4120

Daily 1:00-3:15pm, PSY 120

Off Hrs: M-W 3:20-4:30pm, or by apt.

Dr. James M. Brown

Office: Psy 502

Phone: 542-8045

jmbrown/@juga.edu

Course Obiectives:

By the end of this course students should:

﻿﻿Have gained a general understanding and appreciation of their sensory/perceptual systeis.
﻿﻿Have an understanding of the general anatomy, processes, and functions of the different sensory/perceptual systems.
﻿﻿Be able to engage in meaningful discussions of current approaches to sensation and perception.
﻿﻿Understand the role of theories and models in the study of sensation and perception.
﻿﻿Understand how models are used to generate new psychological knowledge.
﻿﻿Understand how experimental data relate to theories and models of sensory/perceptual processes.
Text: Perception (Sth edition), R. Blake & R. Sekuler

Class Notes: Download file PSYC4120 ClassNotes.pdf from course ELC site.

Supplemental Readings (SR): Two required readings

S class (see below) are available from our ELC site (note

each has its own password).

Grading Policy: Your final grade is determined from a combination of: (1) Four Tests (50%) using your three (3) best scores, (2) Final Exam (35%), (3) Attendance (10%), and, (4) Five Take-home assignments (5%, be sure to read file "Instructions for All Take-Home Assignments*).

Exempting Final Exam: Students with less than or equal to 2 unexcused absences and a 'B' average (80%) or better over all 4 tests may exempt out of the Final Exam and substitute their 4 test average for their Final Exam grade.

See ELC site for details of procedure for exempting final exam and final exam test policy.

Attendance Policy: There are only 19 days of class. Your first two (2) unexcused absences (i.e., those without an authorized doctor's excuse, and not including the drop/add period ending 6/8/15) carry no penalty. Your third unexcused absence results in 5% for attendance. Your fourth unexcused absence results in 0% for attendance.

Testing Policy: All tests will be taken in room 102. All Tests and the Final Exam are 50 question multiple-choice tests based on information covered in lectures, the text, class notes, and supplemental readings. No make-up tests or exams are allowed without an authorized doctor's excuse. All academic work must meet the standards contained in "A Culture of Honesty." Students are responsible for informing themselves about those standards before performing any academic work.

Electronie Devices Policy: The use of laptop computers or handheld electronic devices during class time is not allowed. All handheld devices are to be silenced (i.e., no ringing or vibrating, etc.) and not used during class. A violation includes the instructor hearing or seeing you use your device during lecture. Each violation of the Electronic Devices Policy will result in a I point reduction in the final grade for the course. For example, your final grade calculates out to be a 90 (A) but you violated the Electronic Devices Policy once resulting in a final grade of 89 (A-).