HUMAN BIOCHEMISTRY II (BCMB 4130) 11:10 - 12:25 PM, TUESDAY AND THURSDAY, SPRING 2022
COVERDELL ROOM S175

WE STRONGLY ENCOURAGE ALL STUDENTS TO WEAR MASKS WHILE IN CLASS

Date

Topic

Instructor

JAN 11 13 18 20 25 27
FEB 1 3 8
10 15 17 22 24 MAR 1
3 8,10 15 17 22 24 29 31 APR 5
7 12 14 19 21 26 28 MAY 3

1. Human Pluripotent Stem Cells (hPSCs) Intro/overview 2. hPCSs and cell therapy I 3. hPCSs and cell therapy II (paper discussion) 4. hPSCs and disease mechanism 5. hPSCs and drug discovery 6. hPSCs, disease mechanism and drug discovery II
(paper discussion)
7. Assigned paper discussion 8. Exam #1 9. Biochemistry of development I 10. Biochemistry of development II 11. Birth defects (paper discussion) 12. Biochemistry of cancer I 13. Biochemistry of cancer II 14. Molecular defects in cancer (paper discussion) 15. Assigned paper discussion 16. Exam #2 SPRING BREAK 17. Overview of the drug discovery process 18. Drug discovery I 19. Drug discovery II 20. Isoprenoid biosynthesis as drug target 21. Introduction to clinical pharmacology I 22. Introduction to clinical pharmacology II 23. Assigned paper discussion 24. Exam #3 25. Hemoglobinopathies: Thalassemia/Sickle Cell Disease 26. Biochemistry of Sickle Cell Disease 27. Plasmodium (malaria) and SCD 28. Cures for SCD: Gene Therapy 29. Cures for SCD: Genome Editing (CRISPR-Cas) 30. Gene Drives and Vector control 32. Assigned paper discussion

Zeltner Zeltner Zeltner Zeltner Zeltner Zeltner
Zeltner Zeltner Haltiwanger Haltiwanger Haltiwanger Haltiwanger Haltiwanger Haltiwanger Haltiwanger Haltiwanger
Cassera Cassera Cassera Cassera Cassera Cassera Cassera Cassera Sabatini Sabatini Sabatini Sabatini Sabatini Sabatini Sabatini

Note: Exam #4 will be given during the final exam period (Tues, May 10, 12-3 pm)

The course will be assessed for the four exams (each worth 20%) as well as the student's performance during the assigned paper discussion (20%). The format of the lectures will closely parallel the format of BCMB 4120.

Instructions for in-class paper presentation:

This assignment will constitute 20% of your total grade and will be graded on a 100point scale like the regular exams. Your goal is to work together in small teams to present the context and data in a research article from the primary literature. In most cases, there will be a "news and views" summary that will accompany the paper that can be used to help you gain an overview of the topic and finding. Your instructor will either provide guidelines as to how the paper should be divided or leave that task to your team but everyone should aim to present about 8-10 minutes each during the inclass presentation. This assignment will 1) develop your abilities in condensing and simplifying complex subjects, 2) hone your skills analyzing and interpreting experimental data, and 3) build your oral presentation capability.

Your presentation should be prepared as a PowerPoint or Keynote file with a reasonable amount of information on each slide (e.g. one figure or part of a figure). Not all of the figures in the paper need to be shown. A suggested plan is to have 1 team member provide the background for the study including the major question being addressed and the hypothesis (this information is usually is found in the introduction of the article), 3-4 team members should cover the data in the paper (found in the results section), and the 1 team member the conclusions/discussion (found in the discussion section). You will be graded on the quality on your presentation and grasp of the material, but not your presentation skills. In other words, points will not be taken away for nervous speakers. That said, the most confident and clearest presentations come from speakers who know their subject matter well. We recommend that you share your presentation along the way with your instructor and schedule a time to meet so they can provide constructive feedback before your presentation.

Course Faculty:

Robert Haltiwanger (Course Director) Nadja Zeltner Maria Cassera Robert Sabatini

3065 CCRC 2212 CMM A220A LSB A426A LSB

rhalti@uga.edu Nadja.Zeltner@uga.edu Maria.Cassera@uga.edu sabatini@uga.edu

The course syllabus is a general plan for instruction; unannounced deviations to content may occur. UGA Student Honor Code: "I will be academically honest in all of my academic work and will not tolerate academic dishonesty of others." A Culture of Honesty, the University's policy and procedures for handling cases of suspected dishonesty, can be found at https://honesty.uga.edu. Lack of knowledge of the academic honesty policy is not a reasonable explanation for a violation. Questions related to course assignments and the academic honesty policy should be directed to an instructor.

Mental Health and Wellness Resources:  If you or someone you know needs assistance, you are encouraged to contact Student Care and Outreach in the Division of Student Affairs at 706-542-7774 or visit https://sco.uga.edu/. They will help you navigate any difficult circumstances you may be facing by connecting you with the appropriate resources or services.
 UGA has several resources for a student seeking mental health services (https://www.uhs.uga.edu/bewelluga/bewelluga) or crisis support (https://www.uhs.uga.edu/info/emergencies).
 If you need help managing stress anxiety, relationships, etc., please visit BeWellUGA (https://www.uhs.uga.edu/bewelluga/bewelluga) for a list of FREE workshops, classes, mentoring, and health coaching led by licensed clinicians and health educators in the University Health Center.
 Additional resources can be accessed through the UGA App.

