PSYC 4130: Physiological and Comparative Psychology
Instructor: Dr. Rich Suplita Office: 218 Psychology Email: rsuplita@uga.edu Lecture: 1:25-2:15 MWF Office Hours: By appointment
Required Materials:
Carlson, N.R. (2010). Physiology of Behavior (11th Ed.). New York: Allyn & Bacon. My working assumption is that you have access to the 11th edition text. Please do not ask me if the 10th (or earlier) edition will be acceptable, because I don't know. Yes, they are quite similar, but I will be working only from the 11th edition text.
May come bundled with Pearson's "MyPsychLab" application. You DO NOT need this.
Course Objectives:
The purpose of this course is to relate the basics of how the nervous system interfaces its environment to subserve the cognitive faculties, to mediate sensory and perceptual processes and to regulate behavior. We will survey fundamental principles from behavioral and cognitive neuroscience, neuroanatomy, neurophysiology, neuroendocrinology, psychopharmacology, neurology and clinical psychology.
Attendance:
Attendance is expected and missing class too frequently may negatively impact your grade. I will not provide class materials to students who are absent and lack a valid medical or University-approved excuse. (An example of a valid medical excuse would be a signed and dated physician's note, whereas an example of a University-approved excuse would be a roster and schedule for the sports team you might happen to be on.) If you miss class for any other reason, you should meet with a classmate to discuss what you missed (and to borrow any auxiliary notes). Please DON'T expect a response in such cases if you email me asking if you "missed anything." Any credit that was earned on the missed day (e.g. quiz grade, participation, et cetera) will not be available to you if you miss class without a valid medical or University-approved excuse (or an express, written excuse from either your TA or me). Don't ask me to make an exception for you, because I won't. Just plan on being in class on time every day, and it won't be an issue for you.
Very Important Exception: If you are truly viral, DO NOT come to class! Contact either your TA or me via email and make alternate arrangements to catch up on anything you have missed when you are no longer contagious!

Classroom Commandments:
At the risk of seeming old-fashioned--and we all know that old = no good--I have a handful of expectations regarding your attitude and behaviors to which you are expected to adhere.
1. Check eLC EVERY MORNING before class for any special announcements!
2. Use electronic devices only for educational purposes relevant to my class. I reserve the right to ask you to turn your computer off and leave if you are "busted" using them for alternate purposes (e.g. facebook, Pinterest, texting) It's pretty obvious when people do this, so please save yourself the potential embarrassment and cultivate an ability to periodically postpone your social life for fifty minutes.
3. When I begin lecturing, promptly stop talking.
4. Do not read the newspaper, books, study for other classes, work crosswords, Soduku, et cetera during class time.
5. Do not sleep (or otherwise appear as if you're asleep) during class. If you are too tired to come to class that day, stay home. This is college; we don't call your parents if you're absent. If you fall asleep or begin to yawn repeatedly and indiscreetly, I reserve the right to regain your attention by whatever means I choose.
6. You are expected to have read the assigned readings for the day. There are no unannounced quizzes in here, because I am announcing right now that you just might have a quiz on any given class day! 
7. Be punctual, and stay the whole time. Some students get into the habit of showing up five or more minutes late to each class session. Please recognize how rude this is and make it a priority to be punctual. Also, I know how to read a clock, and I will not go over the allotted time, so please don't start packing up before class is over.
8. If you are unable to abide by the guidelines outlined above, please avail yourself of the opportunity to drop the course now! I am serious about this stuff, and if you are inclined to break these rules and are going to be offended if I call you out, there is no point in your staying. Being an adult with ADHD (yes, really), infractions might sometimes go completely unnoticed, and other times, I cannot ignore them, even if I try! Again, I am giving you fair warning. You will find that I am actually an extremely reasonable and personable teacher if you adhere to these guidelines! 

Class Credit Breakdown and Policies:
There will be four exams each worth 25% of your final grade. Your first exam grade will be dropped if it is the lowest of the first three. In this event, I will count the lowest of your second and third exam grades twice in order to replace the low score on the first exam. The final exam will be semi-comprehensive, and you must take it at the scheduled time and date!
There will be no extra credit on any of the exams; however, I will use quizzes for extra credit. Expect the exams to be challenging, and note that I will no longer provide comprehensive study guides. The eLC notes and any notes you take in class will serve as your study guide. You will likely want to avail yourself of whatever extra credit points are made available.

Determining Overall Course Grade: Your scores will be computed as a percentage and grades assigned as follows:

X > 92

A

90 > X > 92

A-

88 > X > 90

B+

82 > X > 88

B

80 > X > 82

B-

78 > X > 80

C+

72 > X > 78

C

70 > X > 72

C-

60 > X > 70

D

Below 60

F

Academic Honesty: All academic work must meet the University's standards contained in "A
Culture of Honesty" found in your student handbooks and which may be accessed online at the following URL: http://www.uga.edu/honesty/ahpd/culture_honesty.htm. Students are responsible for informing themselves about those standards before performing any academic work. Academic dishonesty of any kind, be it plagiarism, cheating, or turning in work submitted for credit in another course, will not be tolerated! Infractions will be reported to the appropriate authority. Please note that I am ethically bound to report any and all instances of academic dishonesty that come to my attention.

Students with Disabilities: If any student has circumstances requiring special attention or accommodation, please contact me as soon as possible. Your information will be held confidential.

Tentative Schedule: This schedule is subject to change, but I will notify you in class and on eLC if anything significant is altered. The exam dates will not be changed.

Date 6-Jan 8-Jan 10-Jan 13-Jan 15-Jan 17-Jan 20-Jan 22-Jan 24-Jan 27-Jan 39-Jan 31-Jan 3-Feb 5-Feb 7-Feb 10-Feb 12-Feb 14-Feb 17-Feb 19-Feb 21-Feb 24-Feb 26-Feb 28-Mar 3-Mar 5-Mar 7-Mar 17-Mar 19-Mar 21-Mar 24-Mar 26-Mar 28-Mar 31-Mar 2-Apr 4-Apr 7-Apr 9-Apr 11-Apr

Day MON WED FRI MON WED FRI MON WED FRI MON WED FRI MON WED FRI MON WED FRI MON WED FRI MON WED FRI MON WED FRI MON WED FRI MON WED FRI MON WED FRI MON WED FRI

Topic(s) Course Intro & Philosophical Background
Cells of the Nervous System Cells of the Nervous System Cells of the Nervous System Cells of the Nervous System Overview of Neuroanatomy
UGA CLOSED: MLK DAY Overview of Neuroanatomy Overview of Neuroanatomy EXAM ONE: Bring Pencils!
Neuroscience Methods Neuroscience Methods Neuroscience Methods
Senses Senses Senses Senses Movement Movement EXAM TWO: Bring Pencils Sleep and Biorhythms Sleep and Biorhythms Sex and Reproduction Sex and Reproduction Sex and Reproduction Emotions Emotions Emotions EXAM THREE: Bring Pencils Learning and Memory Learning and Memory Learning and Memory Neurological Disorders Neurological Disorders Neurological Disorders Schizophrenia Schizophrenia Affect Disorders Affect Disorders

Carlson Text Ch 1 Ch 1 Ch 2 Ch 2 Ch 2 Ch 3
Ch 3 Ch 3 Chs 1-3 Ch 5 Ch 5 Ch 5 Ch 6 Ch 6 Ch 7 Ch 7 Ch 8 Ch 8 Chs 5-8 Ch 9 Ch 9 Ch 10 Ch 10 Ch 10 Ch 11 Ch 11 Ch 11 Chs 9-11 Ch 13 Ch 13 Ch 13 Ch 15 Ch 15 Ch 15 Ch 16 Ch 16 Ch 16 Ch 16

14-Apr 16-Apr 18-Apr 21-Apr 23-Apr 25-Apr 28-Apr 5-May

MON WED FRI MON WED FRI MON MON

Stress-Based Pathologies Stress-Based Pathologies Stress-Based Pathologies Substance Abuse and Addiction Substance Abuse and Addiction Substance Abuse and Addiction
Review for Final Exam FINAL EXAM: 12-3

Ch 17 Ch 17 Ch 17 Ch 18 Ch 18 Ch 18
Semi-Comp

