Instructor: Nicole Stringham, M.S.

Office: Psychology building, rm. 609

Email: ntstringham@gmail.com

Teaching Assistant: Yonat Eschar office: Psychology building, rm. 603 email: yonat@uga.cdu

The objective of this course is to provide a detailed introduction to biological psychology. We will explore the biological and physiological mechanisms that underlie human and non-human behavior, and use that knowledge for clinical and practical applications. Lectures and readings will initially focus on anatomy, the nervous system, the senses, and the effects of psychoactive drugs, and then progress to utilize that fundamental knowledge to explain behavior (such as emotion, stress, and sleep).

Required Materials

Text: Klein and Thorne, (2007). Biological Psychology, Worth Publishing, New York, NY.

Evaluation

In-class assignments/ participation: These assignments will be done during class at random times. Students must be present in order to obtain credit for in-class assignments. Collectively, these assignments will be worth 100 points,

Exams: There will be four exams (including the final exam) during the semester. The exams will consist of a combination of multiple choice, fill-in-the-blank, and short-essay. Each of the exams will be worth 100 points There will be no make up exams without a university approved (or medical) documentation.

Assignment of letter grades

%

93 - 100

89 - 92.9

86 - 88.9

83 - 85.9

80 - 82.9

77 - 79.9

70 - 76,9

60 - 69

Below 60

Grade

A

A-B+

B

B-C+

C

D

F

Classroom experience and readings

Students should read the assigned material before class and come to class prepared to discuss that material. Since this course may be more technical than some other psychology courses, I encourage students to contact me with questions often. I check my email a lot, so feel free to ask questions via email at any time. I also encourage you to meet with other students to discuss the readings, exams, or assignments. Also, please don't text or play on your computer during class, it is distracting to other students, and I reserve the right to ask you to leave class because of it. You may think that you're being sneaky but, even though I do not have the powers of "mind control," "brain control,” or have eyes in the back of my head, I can tell, just ask my sister.



Office hours:  by appointment only

