PSYC 4140: Cognitive Neuroscience
Instructor: Dr. Rich Suplita Office: 218 Psychology Email: rsuplita@uga.edu (preferred to eLC email) Phone: 706-542-2174 (leave message) Lecture: 11:15-12:05am MWF Office Hours: Most Mondays and Wednesdays, 2:30-4:30PM and by appointment
Required Materials:
Ward, J. (2010). The Student's Guide to Cognitive Neuroscience (2nd ed.) London: Psychology Press.
Course Objectives:
The purpose of this course is to relate the basics of how the central nervous system operates as a physiological machine, how its operation gives rise to cognitive experience, and how technology is being used to better understand the relationship between these two phenomena. Particular emphasis will be given to the use of technologies such as fMRI, PET, MEG, EEG, SPECT, et cetera in investigating psychopathology.
Attendance and Participation:
Attendance is expected and missing class too frequently can negatively impact your grade. I will not provide class materials to students who are absent. If you miss class, you are responsible for obtaining the notes (and whatever other information you missed) from a classmate. Please DON'T expect a response to emails asking me if you "missed anything."
Any credit that was earned on the missed day (e.g. quiz grade, participation, et cetera) will not be available to you if you miss class without a valid medical or University-approved excuse. (All such excuses must be signed, with a printed name and phone number of an individual I can contact to verify your absence on that date. Fabrication or falsification of these documents constitutes academic dishonesty and will be forwarded to the Office of the Vice-President for Instruction where you will face charges.)
If you miss fewer than 10% of all class meetings, your grade will not be negatively impacted by an occasional absence. This equates to about 3 or 4 absences over the course of the semester. However, do note that if you are physically present, but you are consistently distracted with extraneous diversions (e.g. surfing the web, texting, reading the newspaper, working crossword puzzles, et cetera), you will still fail to receive credit for that day if I notice it.
Comportment Standards:
You are expected to conduct yourself respectfully and professionally during class and to

engage the course material. Here are some important points of reference, just to make sure we're all on the same page, and to minimize misunderstandings:
 You should not use your cell phones during class, and they should be turned to silent or vibrate. If you are expecting an important call, let me know before class, and kindly and quietly excuse yourself when the call comes. Other than that, you are expected to stay off your phones (e.g. no texting!) during class.
 If you use a laptop to take notes, that is fine. Do not use it to surf the web. THIS IS ONLY A 50 MINUTE CLASS...so nobody should be going through social network withdrawal convulsions by unplugging for just a little while! Surfing sites like facebook is not only distracting to you, it is also distracting to the students sitting around you. And regardless of your intentions, I perceive it as disrespectful. (Yes, the generation gap has been duly noted. But still, this is MY class.)
 Make it a habit to arrive on time, unpacked and ready to begin. We will begin promptly as scheduled. If you are going to be more than ten minutes late, then do not bother showing up that day. You will lose any participation credit that may have been offered for that class period.
 Try to minimize exiting the room during the class period. (It is only 50 minutes after all. You can probably wait it out.) Obviously, if you really *need* to leave, that's fine. Quietly excuse yourself using the rear door.
 Do not start packing up until I have completely finished the lecture for that day. It will be clearly evident when I am done, and I will NOT go over! It is both distracting and rude to start packing up ahead of time.
 If you need to leave early for any reason, let me know about it before class begins, and quietly excuse yourself when the time comes for you to leave.
Note that infractions of these rules may lead to you losing participation credit if it is available and may lower your grade in other ways, too. I reserve the right to "call out" infractions in front of the class. While this may seem condescending or otherwise patronizing to you, I don't think that it's too much to ask college students to act in a professional and respectful (and attentive) manner for 50 minutes, three times a week. If this is simply beyond you or if you feel that I'm being unreasonable, please drop the class as soon as possible to make room for someone else who wants to take it and who will conduct herself or himself in a mature, responsible manner.
Class Credit Breakdown and Policies:
There will be four exams each worth 25% of your final grade. The final will NOT be cumulative. The exams will be based primarily on the class notes (e.g. PowerPoints, Word documents, et cetera posted to eLC, which you'll need to fill in notes for), and will mostly matching, multiple-choice and short-answer. There will be no extra credit on any of the exams; however, I am likely to use attendance/participation and (perhaps) unannounced quizzes (based on the readings, activities or videos assigned for that day) or homework to grant you a certain degree of extra credit on the exams. That being said, the exams will be

challenging for most students, so you will likely wish to avail yourself of these points whenever they are offered.
Determining Overall Course Grade:
Your scores will be computed as a percentage and grades assigned as follows:

X > 92

A

90 > X > 92

A-

88 > X > 90

B+

82 > X > 88

B

80 > X > 82

B-

78 > X > 80

C+

72 > X > 78

C

70 > X > 72

C-

60 > X > 70

D

Below 60

F

Academic Honesty: All academic work must meet the University's standards contained in "A
Culture of Honesty" found in your student handbooks and which may be accessed online at the following URL: http://www.uga.edu/honesty/ahpd/culture_honesty.htm. Students are responsible for informing themselves about those standards before performing any academic work. Academic dishonesty of any kind, be it plagiarism, cheating, or turning in work submitted for credit in another course, will not be tolerated! Infractions will be reported to the appropriate authority. Please note that I am ethically bound to report any and all instances of academic dishonesty that come to my attention.

Students with Disabilities: If any student has circumstances requiring special attention or accommodation, please contact me as soon as possible. Your information will be held confidential.

Tentative Schedule (Continued on Next Page): The course syllabus is a general plan for the course; deviations announced to the class by the instructor may be necessary.

Date 10-Jan 12-Jan 14-Jan 19-Jan 21-Jan 24-Jan 26-Jan 28-Jan 31-Jan 2-Feb 4-Feb

Topic(s) Course Intro Intro to Cognitive Neuroscience Intro to Cognitive Neuroscience The Brain: Structure and Function The Brain: Structure and Function The Electrophysiological Brain The Electrophysiological Brain Brain Imaging Brain Imaging Brain Imaging EXAM ONE (Chs 1-4)

Notes, et cetera N/A Chapter 1 Chapter 1 Chapter 2 Chapter 2 Chapter 3 Chapter 3 Chapter 4 Chapter 4 Chapter 4 BRING PENCILS!

7-Feb 9-Feb 11-Feb 14-Feb 16-Feb 18-Feb 21-Feb 23-Feb 25-Feb 28-Feb 2-Mar 4-Mar 7-Mar 9-Mar 11-Mar 21-Mar 23-Mar 25-Mar 28-Mar 30-Mar 1-Apr 4-Apr 6-Apr 8-Apr 11-Apr 13-Apr 15-Apr 18-Apr 20-Apr 22-Apr 25-Apr 27-Apr 29-Apr 2-May 4-May

Brain Lesions Brain Lesions Vision Vision Vision The Brain and Space The Brain and Space The Brain and Space The Brain and Movement The Brain and Movement Memory and the Brain Memory and the Brain Memory and the Brain EXAM TWO (Chs 5-9) TBA Audition Audition Spoken Language Spoken Language Literacy and the Brain Literacy and the Brain Literacy and the Brain EXAM THREE (Chs 10-12) The Quantitative Brain The Quantitative Brain The Central Executive The Central Executive The Central Executive The Social and Emotional Brain The Social and Emotional Brain The Social and Emotional Brain Brain Development Brain Development Review for Final Exam FINAL EXAM 12PM (Chs 13-16)

Chapter 5 Chapter 5 Chapter 6 Chapter 6 Chapter 6 Chapter 7 Chapter 7 Chapter 7 Chapter 8 Chapter 8 Chapter 9 Chapter 9 Chapter 9 BRING PENCILS! TBA Chapter 10 Chapter 10 Chapter 11 Chapter 11 Chapter 12 Chapter 12 Chapter 12 BRING PENCILS! Chapter 13 Chapter 13 Chapter 14 Chapter 14 Chapter 14 Chapter 15 Chapter 15 Chapter 15 Chapter 16 Chapter 16 Bring Questions BRING PENCILS!

