Psychology 4140, Cognitive Neuroscience - Syllabus, Fall 2018
Tue Thurs. 11:00am - 12:15pm, Psychology 120

Instructor: Brian W. Haas, Ph.D. Office: Psychology 522 Office Hours: by appointment Email: bhaas@uga.edu
The course syllabus is a general plan for the course; deviations announced to the class by the instructor may be necessary.

General Course Information: This course will cover the origins and principles of cognitive neuroscience and the types of research that are conducted in the field. We will cover classic, seminal, and current studies on how the brain performs various tasks (e.g., language, memory, attention, perception). The primary goal of the course is for students to improve their analytical and critical thinking ability to read and interpret empirical cognitive neuroscience research.

Required Text
1. Brain and Behavior: A Cognitive Neuroscience Perspective: 1st Edition by David Eagleman and Jonathan Downar
2. The Mind's Eye Paperback by Oliver Sacks

Assignments
Exams (40% of Grade): There will be two exams in this class. The first exam (15% of grade) will be Thursday, September 27th. The final exam (25% of grade) will be cumulative. Exams will include a mix of multiple choice and short answer. Exams will cover material from the textbooks, lectures and articles. Anything in the textbook, handed out in class or presented in class may appear on an exam. Students will have one class period to complete each exam. Students will be allowed to use, and refer to, the articles that were previously handed out in class (Teach and Learn articles).
Critical Thinking Individual (10% of Grade): Each student will be given an article based on a recent scientific study. Each student will be assigned to perform a critical analysis of the study and write a paper (~4 pages) outlining their critique.
Critical Thinking Team (10% of Grade): Each team will be given an article based on a recent scientific study. Each team will be assigned to perform a critical analysis of the study and write a paper (~6 pages with Figures) outlining their critique. For the team project, please include a short paragraph detailing the contribution of each team member.
 What are the limitations of this study?  How could this study be improved?  What are some alternative interpretations of the results?  What specific novel ideas do you have to investigate this research topic?

Discussion Points (10% of Grade): A portion of this class will consist of discussing the readings from the text (The Mind's Eye Paperback by Oliver Sacks). In order to facilitate discussions, each student is assigned to complete 4 out 5 Discussion Points. The discussion points are due to me in email (by 1:00pm the day prior of the day we discuss the reading; see schedule: "DPs due"). The discussion points should consist of:
 Something that you thought was interesting (changed your thinking): 2 - 3 sentences.  Some new question that you have, inspired by the reading: 1 sentence.  Some new information that you learned (outside of the reading), perhaps you searched and
found out about this through an internet search: 2 - 3 sentences.
*When emailing me your Discussion Points, please use a Word Document and name the file with your name. Discussion points are not counted towards your grade if you do not attend on the day of the discussion.
Teach and Learn (10% of Grade): Prior to each Teach and Learn day, students will be given 2 readings. Half of the class will be assigned to be prepared to teach fellow students about 1 of the readings, and the other half of the class will be assigned to teach fellow students about the other reading. Credit will be granted based on how well each student is teaching their material to their fellow students.
Compare and Contrast Paper (10% of Grade): Each student will be assigned to search for and find two scientific articles that describe specific studies that investigate a similar psychological mechanism but use two different approaches. Then, each student will write a paper (~4 pages) describing the commonalities and differences and as well as the strengths and weaknesses that exist for the two studies. For example, one may be interested in the psychological mechanism, "Memory." Two different approaches may be:
 -humans vs. animals  -mice vs. primates  -brain imaging vs. electroencephalography (EEG)  -healthy vs. clinical/lesions patients
Final Project (10% of Grade): Students will be paired with a fellow student within the class. Each team will be assigned a brain region and will then make a brief presentation to the class on the brain region. The brain region will be randomly assigned to each team towards the end of the semester. Presentations will include a few power point slides and be approximately 5 - 10 minutes in lengths. The presentations will occur on the last two regular class periods (November 27 and 29).
Attendance: Attendance will be taken. If a student is marked absent more than 3 class periods, their grade will be reduced by 5%. If a student is more than 5 minutes late to class, this counts as an absence.

Grading

Breakdown of your grade:

Exam 1

15%

Final Exam

25%

Critical Thinking (Individual) 10%

Critical Thinking (Team)

10%

University Grading Standards:

A

>92.5%

C+

A- 90.0%

C

B+ 87.5%

C-

B

82.5%

D+

B- 80.0%

D

F

Discussion Points

10%

Teach and Learn

10%

Compare and Contrast Paper 10%

Final Project

10%

77.5% 72.5% 70.0% 67.5% 60% <60%

Course Policies
Late/Make-up Work: There will be no make-up exams. If you miss an exam for any well-documented legitimate reason, your final exam grade will be applied to your grade for the missed exam. Late assignments will be accepted for full credit only in well-documented emergencies. Hard copies of all assignments must be turned in directly (i.e., in person, NOT mailbox) to the instructor.
Incompletes: A grade of "Incomplete" will be granted only in the most severe emergencies and at the discretion of the instructor. Written documentation is required. Students seeking an Incomplete must make specific arrangements with the instructor before the end of the semester.
Scholastic Dishonesty/Academic Misconduct: All academic work must meet the standards contained in "A Culture of Honesty." All students are responsible to inform themselves about those standards before performing any academic work. The University defines their policy on scholastic dishonesty as follows: "No student shall perform, attempt to perform, or assist another in performing any act of dishonesty on academic work to be submitted for academic credit or advancement. A student does not have to intend to violate the honesty policy to be found in violation." Examples of academic dishonesty include, but are not limited to, plagiarism, unauthorized assistance, giving false information or tampering with academic work, and theft. Concerning written assignments, passages of more than five words should not be taken directly from another source without proper attribution. We expect that the work you submit will reflect your individual efforts. There is nothing wrong with including the work of others in your papers as long as you acknowledge the source. If it is determined that a student has engaged in any form of academic misconduct, he or she may be given an F for the course, will be reported to the Office of the Vice President for Instruction, and may face additional sanctions from the University. For more information concerning academic misconduct, please visit http://uga.edu/honesty.
Students with Disabilities: Students with disabilities or special needs are encouraged to contact the instructor to discuss any arrangements that may be needed to facilitate their work in the course. The University of Georgia seeks to provide students with disabilities the opportunity to fully participate in educational programs and services. In keeping with this philosophy, it is University policy that students with documented disabilities receive reasonable accommodations through access to classroom information. If you plan to request accommodations for a disability, please register with the Disability Resource Center, which is located in 114 Clark Howell Hall or via the internet at http://www.dissvcs.uga.edu/

Schedule
Date Tue, Aug 14 Thur, Aug 16 Tue, Aug 21 Thur, Aug 23 Tue, Aug 28 Thur, Aug 30 Tue, Sep 4 Thur, Sep 6 Tue, Sep 11 Thur, Sep 13 Tue, Sep 18 Thur, Sep 20 Tue, Sep 25 Thur, Sep 27 Tue, Oct 2 Thur, Oct 4 Tue, Oct 19 Thur, Oct 11 Tue, Oct 16 Thur, Oct 18 Tue, Oct 23 Thur, Oct 25 Tue, Oct 30 Thur, Nov 1 Tue, Nov 6 Thur, Nov 8 Tue, Nov 13 Thur, Nov 15 Nov 20 / 22 Tue, Nov 27 Thur, Nov 29 Tue, Dec 11

Topic

Book Chapter

Assignments Due

Intro/History

1

Navigating the Nervous System

2

2

Neurons and Synapses

3

3

Neuroplasticity

4 Teach and Learn 1

4 DP1 due (Mon, Sep 3, @1:00pm)

Attention and Consciousness

8

8 Teach and Learn 2

Memory

9 DP2 due (Wed, Sep 10, @1:00pm)

9

Sleep

10 Teach and Learn 3

10 Critical Thinking Paper due

Exam

go over exam

Emotions

13 DP3 due (Wed, Oct 4, @1:00pm)

13 Teach and Learn 4

13

Motivation and Reward

14 Compare and Contrast Paper due

14

14 DP4 due (Mon, Oct 22, @1:00pm)

Social Cognition

15

15 Teach and Learn 5

15

Disorders

16 Team Critical Thinking Project due

16

16 DP5 due (Mon, Nov 13, @1:00pm)

In class activity

Thanksgiving Break

Final Project Presentations

Final Project Presentations

FINAL EXAM: 12:00 - 3:00pm

