Biological Foundations of Health Psychology, PSY 4150

Class: TR, 11:10-12:25

MLC 248

Instructor: B. Randy Hammond (bhammond@uga.edu), Psychology, Room 520

TA: Britni Surprenant (Britni.Surprenant@uga.edu), Psychology, Room 131

Cffice hours: in-person or zoom appointments

COURSE DESCRIPTION (from UGA bulletin): Psychological influences on health, illness, and responses to those states, as well as psychological origins and outcomes of health policy and health interventions.

REQUIRED READINGS: This course does not require a text. The readings are specified topically and are available as pdfs that are accessible on ELC.

Learning Objectives: Interpret and evaluate research findings in Health Psychology To analyze the role of behavior and lifestyle in health disparities across the globe To evaluate the evidence for a role of lifestyle and behavior in acquired illness Critique and synthesize research on the factors involved in causing, maintaining, contributing to, preventing, and treating a specific health issue

Evaluation

There is a total of 330 possible points in this course.

Exams (300 points): There will be four exams, three exams during the semester, and a final exam. The dates are indicated in the course outline. Each of the exams will be worth 100 points. Students will be allowed to drop their lowest exam score excluding the final (I will drop the lowest of the first three exams). The final exam cannot be dropped and students must take the final exam. If you are absent on a test day (for whatever reason), then the resulting zero will be the one dropped. There will be no make-ups.

In-class activities (30 points): Students are expected to attend class in-person. We will conduct a number of in-class activities throughout the course of the semester. Students can miss one activity (or sign-in) without penalty.

Assignment of letter The letter grades that Points 330-307 306-297 296-287 286-277 276-264 263-254 253-241 240-231 230-198 197-

grades correspond to the
% 100-93 92-90 89-87 86-84 83-80 79-77 76-73 72-70 69-60 59-

point

system are shown Grade A AB+ B BC+ C CD F

below:

Regular rounding rules apply and will be applied equally to all students. Any errors in grading should be pointed out asap and students should refrain from making an appointment to search through exams in attempts to increase points.

Exam Structure: The exams will be a combination of short-answer, multiple-choice, and true-false questions. The exams will always have some extra-credit questions.

Date Aug. 19 Aug. 24 Aug. 26 Aug. 31 Sept. 2 Sept. 7 Sept. 9 Sept. 14 Sept. 16 Sept. 21 Sept. 23 Sept. 28 Sept. 30 Oct. 5 Oct. 12 Oct. 14 Oct. 19 Oct. 21 Oct. 26 Oct. 28 Nov 2 Nov. 9 Nov 4 Nov. 11 Nov. 16 Nov. 18 Nov. 23 Nov. 30 Dec 2 Dec. 9

Topic Orientation Basic principles

COURSE OUTLINE

Testing dates

Cells, aging Cancer
Infectious disease/immunology Sensory disorders/pain Stress/substance abuse Respiratory issues Cardiovascular disease Development and health Hunger/diet 12-3 PM

Exam 1 Exam 2 Final Exam

Suggested Readings: Bregman, R. (2020). Humankind: A hopeful history. London: Bloomsbury. Bryson, B. (2019). The Body: A Guide for Occupants. Random House. Harari, Y. N. (2011). Sapiens: A Brief History of Humankind. Vintage.

Levitin, D. J. (2020). Successful aging: A neuroscientist explores the power and potential of our lives. Penguin.
Sapolsky, R. M. (2017). Behave: The biology of humans at our best and worst. Penguin.
Sinclair, D. A., & LaPlante, M. D. (2019). Lifespan: Why We Age--and Why We Don't Have To. Atria Books.
Welch, H. G. (2015). Less medicine, more health: 7 assumptions that drive too much medical care. Beacon press.
Yong, E. (2016). I contain multitudes: The microbes within us and a grander view of life. Random House.
COVID-19 Policies & Information: Currently, UGA is requiring in-person instruction. Per UGA guidelines, mask and vaccinations are strongly encouraged. For those students who test positive for COVID-19, I will accommodate you as I would normally accommodate ill students before the pandemic. I also urge you to remain at home if you develop COVID-19 symptoms (just let me know and your attendance will be excused). Also, please realize that UGA guidelines may change throughout the semester and will be followed accordingly. Please visit https://coronavirus.uga.edu/ for more information on testing, vaccinations and other pandemic-related resources.
Diversity: Diversity encompasses acceptance and respect. The term "diversity" encompasses differences of culture, background and experience among individuals and groups. Such differences include, but are not limited to, differences of race, ethnicity, national origin, color, gender, sexual orientation, gender identity, age, and abilities, as well as political and religious affiliation and socioeconomic status. The University of Georgia embraces a commitment to diversity by modeling for the state and nation, a community of individuals and programs which seek to reduce prejudice, disparities, and discrimination and build a supportive environment for all.
Academic honesty: "I will be academically honest in all of my academic work and will not tolerate academic dishonesty of others." A Culture of Honesty, the University's policy and procedures for handling cases of suspected dishonesty, can be found can be found at: https://honesty.uga.edu/Academic-Honesty-Policy/. All academic work must meet the standards outlined in "A Culture of Honesty" found at: http://honesty.uga.edu/.
Course Plans: The course syllabus is a general plan for the course; deviations announced to the class by the instructor may be necessary.
Incompletes:
A grade of incomplete is only assigned in extremely unusual circumstances. Such situations require extensive documentation and approval of faculty supervisors. It is only an option if a student is passing the class and is typically only awarded when a student has completed the majority of the classwork and is only missing one or two exams or assignments. If a grade of incomplete is approved,

a written plan for completion of the coursework must be developed by the instructor and student and approved by the faculty supervisor.
Accommodations due to disability:
If you plan to request accommodations for a disability, please register with the Disability Resource Center (DRC). The DRC can be reached by visiting Clark Howell Hall, by calling 706-542-8719 (voice) or 706-5428778 (TTY), or by visiting http://drc.uga.edu.
Mental Health and Wellness Resources:
If you or someone you know needs assistance, you are encouraged to contact Student Care and Outreach in the Division of Student Affairs at 706-542-7774 or visit https://sco.uga.edu. They will help you navigate any difficult circumstances you may be facing by connecting you with the appropriate resources or services. UGA has several resources for a student seeking mental health services (https://www.uhs.uga.edu/bewelluga/bewelluga) or crisis support (https://www.uhs.uga.edu/info/emergencies). If you need help managing stress anxiety, relationships, etc., please visit BeWellUGA (https://www.uhs.uga.edu/bewelluga/bewelluga) for a list of FREE workshops, classes, mentoring, and health coaching led by licensed clinicians and health educators in the University Health Center. Additional resources can be accessed through the UGA App.
FERPA Notice:
The Federal Family Educational Rights and Privacy Act (FERPA) grants students certain information privacy rights. FERPA allows disclosure of directory information (name, address, telephone, email, date of birth, place of birth, major, activities, degrees, awards, prior schools), unless a https://reg.uga.edu/_resources/documents/imported/FERPARequestForRestriction.pdf is submitted to the Registrar's Office.

