BIOMEDICAL RESEARCH IN HEALTH AND DISEASE CBIO 4200 and 4200H
COURSE INFORMATION
DESCRIPTION: This course will address the impact of biomedical research in human
health and disease. The course is intended primarily for pre-med students; however, science majors may also enroll. Students will be expected to master the concept of how scientific research is done, and the various mechanisms by which biomedical research has impacted individuals and the societies in which they live.
The course will be largely organized in a topical fashion, generally with one or two lectures covering one scientific discovery that has changed medicine.
The lectures files will be available on the course web site and a reading assignment for each lecture will be posted for students to read before the class.
CLASS SCHEDULE: The class will meet for 2 periods per week for didactic
lectures: Tuesday and Thursdays, 2:00-3:15 pm, room S175, Paul D. Coverdell Center.
COURSE COORDINATOR: Dr. Roberto Docampo, Rm S350B, Paul D Coverdell
Center, Tel: 542-8104; Email: rdocampo@uga.edu
OFFICE HOURS: By appointment only. If students need help with the material or
would like to discuss something in more detail, we will encourage them to email me to make an appointment or talk to me after class.
COURSE REQUIREMENT FOR GRADING: 3 exams and a power point and
written presentation. The exams will be based on the lectures' content. The presentation will provide the opportunity to search the literature on one specific scientific discovery and investigate how it changed the medical field. A list of topics and specific instructions will be provided the first week of September. Attendance of each lecture is expected. Formal records of attendance will be kept.
GRADING: Each of the 3 exams and the presentation will individually account for
25% of the final grade. Grades will be assigned on a 100% scale. Students enrolled in the 4200H will have additional course requirements.
EXTRA CREDIT ACTIVITY: A list of lectures will be provided related to biomedical
research and students could have the opportunity to attend one of these lectures and write a one-page summary about the content of the talk.

SCHEDULE FALL 2019

Th Aug 15
Tu Aug 20 Th Aug 22

Lecture
Introduction, Overview, Course Plan, The Secret of Life Research Funding

Additional reading

Scientific integrity

I. Hypothesis-driven research:

Chemistry

Tu Aug 27

Drug design

Th Aug 29

Tyrosine kinases & cancer

Th Sep 3

Free radicals in cancer and aging

Signal Transduction

Th Sep 5

Nitric Oxide in Biology

Tu Sept 10

Calcium signaling and disease

Mathematics/Physics

Th Sep 12

Genomics & other omics, Genome editing

Tu Sep 17

Fluorescence in Biology; The case of GFP

Th Sep 19

EXAM 1

Immunology
Tu Sep 24

Therapeutic antibodies

Microbiology
Th Sep 26

Influenza

Tu Oct 01

Malaria in the world

II. Observational Research

Th Oct 03 Tu Oct 08

HIV & opportunistic infections Obesity epidemic

Speaker
Roberto Docampo
Roberto Docampo Roberto Docampo
Roberto Docampo Sri Ramakrishnan Roberto Docampo
Roberto Docampo Roberto Docampo
Noelia Lander Roberto Docampo
Roberto Docampo
Roberto Docampo Noelia Lander
Sri Ramakrishnan Roberto Docampo

Th Oct 10

EXAM 2

Tu Oct 15

Gene therapy

Th Oct 17 Tu Oct 22

Smallpox eradication Title, abstract and outline for presentation due Public Health (WNV)

Th Oct 24

Hygiene hypothesis

Tu Oct 29

Antibiotic Resistance

Th Oct 31 Tu Nov 05 Th Nov 07 Tu Nov 12 Th Nov 14 Tu Nov 19 Th Nov 21 Th Nov 26-29 Tu Dec 03

Student presentations Student presentations Student presentations Student presentations Student presentations Student presentations Student presentations Thanksgiving break EXAM 3

Roberto Docampo Roberto Docampo
Nuria W. Negrão Silvia Moreno Noelia Lander

