12/14/13

ANTH (ECOL) 4210/6210: ZOOARCHAEOLOGY

Spring, 2014 Class Time: 9:30-10:45 TuTh Lab Time: 11:00-12:15 TuTh Office Hours: 12:15-1:15 TuTh and by appointment

Elizabeth J. Reitz Office: Rm 4, Natural History Bldg Email: ereitz@uga.edu Telephone: 706-542-1464

Text: Zooarchaeology by E. J. Reitz and E. S. Wing. You also will be expected to read reports and articles that pertain to your sample. These will be available in the classroom for check-out.

Course Objectives and Goals:  To identify and compare general theory, site formation processes, basic archaeological field
techniques, and the disciplines that contribute to zooarchaeology, particularly as they apply to zoological evidence of human/environmental relationships.  To identify and compare strengths and weaknesses in the materials, methods, and techniques used in zooarchaeology.  To identify and compare the contributions zooarchaeology makes to studies of the relationships between humans and their environments and to the studies of current environmental issues by documenting historical trends.  To practice professional level research skills needed to do lab-based research in zooarchaeology. These skills include:
identification of mammal, bird, reptile, amphibian, and fish remains quantification of archaeofaunal remains using common zooarchaeological methods; interpretation related to human behavior and environmental relationships.

Schedule of Lectures: January 7-9: Introduction to Zooarchaeology
E. J. Reitz and E. S. Wing, Chapter 1 and Appendix A3. Zooarchaeology January 14-16: Vertebrate Taxonomy and Comparative Osteology
E. J. Reitz and E. S. Wing, Chapter 3. Zooarchaeology January 21-23: Ecology
E. J. Reitz and E. S. Wing, Chapter 4. Zooarchaeology E. J. Reitz, 1988 Evidence for Coastal Adaptations in Georgia and South Carolina. Archaeology of Eastern North America 16:137-158. January 28-30: First and Second Order Changes E. J. Reitz and E. S. Wing, Chapter 5. Zooarchaeology February 4-6: Primary data E. J. Reitz and E. S. Wing, Chapter 6. Zooarchaeology February 11-13: Primary data E. J. Reitz and E. S. Wing, Chapter 6. Zooarchaeology February 18-20: Primary data E. J. Reitz and E. S. Wing, Chapter 6. Zooarchaeology

-2-
February 25-27: Primary data; Mid-term Exam E. J. Reitz and E. S. Wing, Chapter 6. Zooarchaeology
March 4-6: Secondary Data E. J. Reitz and E. S. Wing, Chapter 7. Zooarchaeology
March 10-14: Spring Break March 18-20: Secondary Data
E. J. Reitz and E. S. Wing, Chapter 7. Zooarchaeology March 25-27: Secondary Data
E. J. Reitz and E. S. Wing, Chapter 7. Zooarchaeology April 1-3: Secondary Data
E. J. Reitz and E. S. Wing, Chapter 7. Zooarchaeology April 8-10: Humans as Predators
E. J. Reitz and E. S. Wing, Chapters 8 and 9. Zooarchaeology April 15-17: Past Environments
E. J. Reitz and E. S. Wing, Chapter 10. Zooarchaeology April 22-24: Integration and Conclusions
E. J. Reitz and E. S. Wing, Chapter 11. Zooarchaeology
Important Dates: Lab Tests (30% of grade): January 14: Mammals (class; element; left/right) January 21: Birds (proximal/distal) January 28: Reptiles and Amphibians (epiphysis/diaphysis) February 4: Sharks, Rays, and Fish (MNI; simple interpretation)
Mid-term (30% of grade): Thursday, February 27
Report (30% of grade): March 31 (Monday): Review of identifications should be completed by 5:00 pm April 11 (Friday): Title, Abstract, Tables, and Figures turned in by 5:00 pm April 22: Graduate student presentations May 1: Research Report turned in by 5:00 pm
NO MAKE-UP LAB TESTS OR EXAMS WILL BE GIVEN.
Evaluations: You will be evaluated on the basis of performance on lab tests, the mid-term exam, the research report, class participation, and laboratory techniques. Lab tests will be cumulative and will be 30% of the grade. They will cover osteological materials as well as analysis and quantification techniques. The mid-term exam will test reading and lecture materials and will have a lab component. It will be 30% of the grade. The research report will be 30% of the grade. The remaining 10% of your grade will be based on a subjective evaluation of laboratory skills and class participation.

-3-
Scheduling Class Project: Each student should plan to spend an additional ca. 30-40 hours working on their project (3-4 hrs/wk) using the comparative collection and preparing tables. Room 8 is reserved for the project portion of the class on Tuesdays and Thursdays from 12:15 to 1:45. The room will be available at other times, but this is the only time you can be assured the room will not be in use by another group. Room 8 will be closed after 5:00 and on weekends. It may be closed at other times if other Museum programs need to use the room.
Otherwise, you are responsible for scheduling your additional lab hours. This must be during normal operating hours of the University between 8-5, Monday-Friday, when no other groups are using the classroom. The privilege of using the collection after hours is extended only to lab employees and students who have completed this course with an A. DO NOT ASK TO USE THE LAB AFTER HOURS even if someone authorized to do so will be here. Do not get authorized users in trouble by asking them to let you in. NO EXCEPTIONS WILL BE MADE FOR ANY REASON. One of the objectives of the class is to train students in managing their time and planning in advance so as to get assignments completed.
Sample Review: Before beginning your tables, your identifications will be reviewed for accuracy. Scheduling for the review will be done by appointment. Appointment slots of 3 hours will be available on a first come, first served basis. The appointments will begin on approximately March 17 and run through March 31. If you do not sign up, an appointment slot will be assigned to you. ALL REVIEWS MUST BE COMPLETED BY 5:00 ON MONDAY, MARCH 31. For the review you will need to have completed (1) labels and cards (do not include specimen weight and MNI), (2) measurements, and (3) skeletal drawings. More details will be provided prior to the reviews.
Research Report: (30% of grade): The research report will constitute the final exam. The paper will present the results of your identification and include analysis of the zooarchaeological sample assigned to you. The paper should represent a professional product in every respect, including timeliness and accuracy. It will be sent to the archaeologist who contributed the materials and will constitute your report to that person. Length is not as important as an adequate treatment of the research. Your title, abstract, tables, and figures will be due on FRIDAY, APRIL 11 BY 5:00 PM; and the paper will be due MAY 1 BY 5:00 PM. The paper must be in hard copy form. No electronic submissions will be accepted. NO PAPERS WILL BE ACCEPTED AFTER THIS DATE AND TIME.
Follow the American Antiquity formatting style, which can be found at the back of Volume 57 [4] 1992 or at <http://www.saa.org/Publications/styleGuide/styleGuide.pdf>.
Laboratory Skills and Class Participation: (10% of grade): This is a subjective evaluation of your performance in the class. Examples of skills that will be considered are your handling of the comparative collection and archaeological samples,

-4-
attendance; participation in class and lab discussions; ability to work accurately, independently, and in a timely fashion; ability to follow instructions; and ability to interact appropriately with staff and students. This will also include a subjective evaluation of your use of the collections and the quality of your research skills. Failure to respond to a warning about inappropriate use of comparative and/or archaeological collections will result in dismissal from the class and a failing grade. You will be warned only once.
Class Organization: The first portion of each class meeting will be devoted primarily to lectures, demonstrations, and tests. The second half will be devoted primarily to lab exercises and working on your class project. BRING YOUR TEXTBOOK TO CLASS.
CLASS ATTENDANCE & PARTICIPATION Attendance: Regular and prompt class attendance is required. Students are expected to attend class and attendance will count in your final grade. Students are allowed FOUR absences, regardless of the reasons for the absence. No distinction is made between excused and unexcused absences and no excuses for absences need be given. Your final numerical grade will be reduced by one point for each absence beyond the permitted four absences, except in the case of extreme medical need requiring complete bed rest (e.g., hospitalization) or a court order. Medical or other appointments should not be scheduled for the class period. Habitual late arrivals will count as absences. Participation: You are expected to complete class readings and demonstrate your knowledge of those assignments in class. Assessing your participation is, of necessity, subjective.
GRADUATE STUDENTS: Graduate students will be assigned more difficult and/or larger samples. Their papers should be thoughtful, thorough, and theoretical treatments of the assemblage studied. They will be expected to present a preliminary (15 minute) version of their papers to the class on Tuesday, April 22. The final version will be due on May 1 by 5:00 pm.
NOTES University policies: All university policies with regard to withdrawals, academic honesty, etc. will be strictly followed. As a University of Georgia student, you have agreed to abide by the University's academic honesty policy, A Culture of Honesty, and the Student Honor Code. All academic work must meet the standards described in A Culture of Honesty found at: www.uga.edu/honesty. The unattributed quotation or extensive paraphrasing of material not conceived and composed by the student will initiate action in accordance with the University's policies on academic honesty, as outlined in A Culture of Honesty. Lack of knowledge of the academic honesty policy is not a reasonable explanation for a violation. It is your responsibility to be familiar with these policies before performing any academic work. Questions related to course assignments and the academic honesty policy should be directed to the instructor.

-5-
Syllabus: The course syllabus is a general plan for the course; deviations announced to the class by the instructor may be necessary. Absence from class is not an excuse for being unaware of such changes.

LANDMARK TERMS
Anterior/Posterior Appendicular skeleton (Pelvic and Pectoral girdles and extremities Axial skeleton (skull, vertebrae, ribs, sternum) Canal: tunnel. Sacral canal Caudal/Cranial Condyle: rounded eminence. proximal tibia Crest: a sharp border. sacral crest, iliac crest Dorsal/Ventral Diaphysis: Shaft Digitigrade: phalanges only touch ground Epiphysis: Articular end Flat Bones: Protection and broad muscle support. Examples: scapula, skull Foramen: Hole. Examples: obturator foramen, nutrient foramina Fossa: depression. acetabular fossa, iliac fossa, olecranon fossa, radial fossa, masseteric fossa Head: a smooth rounded eminence for articulation, humerus, femur Incisure: a notch. greater sciatic notch of pelvis, acetabular notch Irregular Bones: vertebrae, maxilla Lateral/Medial Lip: margin of a groove, crest or line Long Bones: Sustains weight, provide muscle attachments. Examples: radius, femur Metaphysis: line of fusion Pectoral girdle (Scapula) Pelvic girdle (Innominates and Sacrum) Proximal/Distal Process: projection. coronoid process of ulna, styloid process, coracoid process of scapula,
transverse processes Plantigrade: podials, metapodials, phalanges touch ground Ridge: long spine. transverse ridge of sacrum Sinus: cavity lined with mucus membrane Short Bones: Compact, elasticity, limited motion.
Examples: Phalanges (Phalanx), Metacarpus, Metatarsus Spine: a sharp prominence. neural spine, acromion spine Sulcus: a groove. medial epicondyle and trochlea of humerus Suture: a junction between bones Symphysis: where bones come together. Pubic symphysis, mandibular symphysis Trochanter: a large prominence for muscle attachments. greater and less trochanters of femur Trochlea: a pulley. distal humerus Unguligrade: only last phalanx touches the ground

SKELETAL ELEMENTS TO KNOW

Skull: Dentary/Mandible Maxilla Premaxilla Nasal Frontal Parietal Squamosal (Temporal) Occipital Zygomatic Arch (Jugal) Incisor Canine Premolar Molar Endocranium Vomer Quadrate Hyomandibula Operculum Preoperculum Articular Cleithrum Otolith
Axial: Centrum Zygopophysis Pygostyle Cervical Thoracic Lumbar Caudal Sacrum Atlas Axis Urostyle

Appendicular Skeleton: Humerus Radius Ulna Femur Tibia Metapodia Patella Tarsal, Carpal Calcaneus Astragalus Carpometacarpus Tarsometatarsus Tibiotarsus Phalanx
Pelvic Girdle: Synsacrum Ilium Ishium Pubis Acetabulum
Other: Epiplastron Entoplastron Hyoplastron Hypoplastron Xiphiplastron Peripheral Costal Nuchal Neural Pygal

Pectoral Girdle: Coracoid Scapula Furculum Sternum Clavicle

Mammal:
Bird: Herptiles: Fish:

KNOW LEFTS AND RIGHTS
Scapula Humerus Mandible Innominate Femur Tibia
Dentary Coracoid Femur
Dentary
Articular Dentary Premaxilla Maxilla

ELEMENTS AND ORDER OR GENUS TO KNOW FROM MEMORY

Didelphis virginiana

Cervical vertebra

Artiodactyl

Astragalus Calcaneus Metacarpus Metatarsus

Galliformes

Tarsometatarsus, male

Alligator sp.

Osteoderm

Apalone spp.

Carapace/plastron

Lepisosteus spp.

Vertebra Scales

Amia calva

Vertebra

Mugil spp.

Vertebra

For the Herptiles, you must know class, order, and suborder for all elements because there are significant morphological differences at all of these taxonomic levels.

4/3/03

PREFERRED (Ernst & Barbour) AND OTHER NAMES FOR

TURTLE BONES AND SCUTES

BONE

Ernst & Barbour

Carr

Romer

Obst

nuchal

proneural

nuchal

nuchal

--

--

--

proneural

peripheral

peripheral

marginal peripheral

costal

pleural

costal

pleural

neural

neural

neural

neural

suprapygal

suprapygal

suprapygal metaneural

pygal

pygal

pygal

pygal

epiplastron

epiplastron

epiplastron

entoplastron

entoplastron

entoplastron

hyoplastron

hyoplastron

hyoplastron

hypoplastron

hypoplastron

hypoplastron

xiphiplastron

xiphiplastron

xiphiplastron

SCUTES Ernst & Barbour cervical marginal pleural vertebral (-) gular humeral pectoral abdominal femoral anal

Carr precentral marginal lateral central postcentral gular humeral pectoral abdominal femoral anal

NOTE ON PECTORAL GIRDLE: There are two bones: the scapula and the coracoid. The scapula has two branches. The longest of these branches is the scapula itself. The shorter branch is the acromial process following Romer (1956). This is correctly labeled on the Carolina Biological Supply bioreview sheet. It is called the precoracoid on the Ward's sheet. The Turtox Key Card has the precoracoid (acromial process) and the scapula itself reversed. For a discussion of this read Romer 1956:307-310.

CURATORIAL INFORMATION AND PRIMARY DATA FOR LABELS AND DATA CARDS
LABELS Site name Site number Provenience and level Field sample number (accession number, lot number, etc.) Catalogue number from the data card Taxonomic identification from the data card
DATA CARDS Taxon Site number Accession number Serial number Site name Provenience and level Field sample number (or accession number, lot number, etc.) Screen size Number of specimens (not necessary for UID Vertebrate or UID Invertebrate) Element represented Symmetry (left, right, axial, indeterminate) Portion (proximal, distal, shaft) Modifications (weathered, carnivore-gnawed, rodent-gnawed, burned, hacked, cut, sawed, worked, pathologies, etc.) Degree of fusion (diaphysis/epiphysis is used only for unfused specimens) Deciduous/permanent dentition Tooth wear (see Payne 1973) Other evidence of age. This will primarily be condition of deciduous P4) Sex Measurements, in mm, may be recorded on a separate form (see Driesch 1976) Other notes Weight, in g Estimate of Minimum Number of Individuals (MNI) For Mammals also prepare the element drawings. This will be primarily for taxa identified below Artiodactyla but others may also require this step. The element drawings should have the catalogue number, fusion, and side noted beside each specimen drawn so it can be correlated with the data cards.

CHECKLIST FOR ZOOARCHAEOLOGY REPORTS

Section

Comments

Title Page

Title of paper, author, author's address, and date

Abstract

No more than 100 words (see Landes 1966)

Introduction

Purpose of paper, literature review, set up for presentation of

data from specific assemblage being reported

Materials

Description of archaeological site

Methods

Field recovery methods and zooarchaeological methods

Results

Description of what was found; no interpretation

Discussion

Interpret results and tie them to purpose as outlined in the

Introduction

Conclusions

Summarize what was concluded as a result of the research

Acknowledgments

Acknowledge the funding source, owner of the site, and field

personnel

Bibliography

Follow Chicago Manual of Style or some other widely-used

style guide

Figures

Tables

Species List

Summary Table

Elements Represented

Modifications

Age

Measurements, in mm

Others as appropriate to the research goals

Appendices

List of Proveniences

Others as appropriate to the research goals

IDENTIFICATION CHECK APPOINTMENTS
March 17: 9:00-12:00 March 17: 1:00-4:00 March 19: 9:00-12:00 March 19: 1:00-4:00 March 21: 9:00-12:00 March 21: 1:00-4:00 March 24: 9:00-12:00 March 24: 1:00-4:00 March 26: 9:00-12:00 March 26: 1:00-4:00 March 28: 9:00-12:00 March 28: 1:00-4:00 March 31: 9:00-12:00 March 31: 1:00-4:00
YOU MAY SWAP WITH SOMEONE ELSE IN THE CLASS. EACH REVIEW REQUIRES A THREE HOUR BLOCK OF TIME. REVIEWS MUST BE FINISHED BY 5:00 pm ON MONDAY, MARCH 31.

4/3/03 PREFERRED TERMS (IN BOLD) AND OTHER TERMS FOR CARPALS AND TARSALS
PREFERRED TERM (Sisson and Grossman primarily)

CARPALS Radial carpal Intermediate carpal Ulnar carpal Accessory carpal 1st carpal 2nd carpal 3rd carpal 4th carpal

Scaphoid Lunar Pyramidal Pisiform Trapezium Trapazoid Capitate Unciform

Navicular Semilunar Medial
Greater multangular Lesser multangular (fused in Bovids) Hamate

Lunate Triangular
(not in Bovidae) (fused in Bovidae)
Os crochu

Central Triquetrum

Fused Carpals: Scapho-lunar Carpals 2+3

Intermedioradiale Magnum

(fused in Felidae and Canidae)

capitato-trapezoid

trapezoideocapitatum (fused in Bovidae)

TARSALS Calcaneus Astragalus Os Malleolare Navicular 1st tarsal 2nd tarsal 3rd tarsal Cuboid

Fibular tarsal Tibial tarsal Fibula Central tarsal Internal tarsal Middle tarsal External tarsal 4th tarsal

Talus

Lateral malleolare

Scaphoid

(Fused with cuboid in Bovidae)

Medial cuneiform

Entocuneiform

Grand Cuneiform

Intermediate cuneiform Mesocuneiform

(fused in Bovidae)

Lateral cuneiform

Ectocuneiform

(fused in Bovidae)

(Fused with navicular in Bovidae)

Fused Tarsals (Artiodactyla): Cubonavicular Tarsal 2+3

Central + 4th tarsal

Centroquartale

Naviculocuboideum

The order is from the first range of carpals/tarsals to the second range; and the medial side to the lateral one.

