12/3/13

ANTH (ECOL) 4290/6290 ENVIRONMENTAL ARCHAEOLOGY

Spring Semester, 2014 Time: TuTh 2:00-3:15 ereitz@uga.edu

Dr. Elizabeth J. Reitz Office: Rm 4, Natural History Building Office Hours: 12:15-1:15 TuTh and by appointment

TEXT: Reitz, E. J., and Shackley, M. 2012. Environmental Archaeology.

COURSE OBJECTIVES AND GOALS: Students will become informed users of the historical record of human resource use and of environmental change and stasis that is available from archaeological sites with emphasis on biological data from archaeological sites, the dynamic relationships between humans and their environments, and current environmental issues.

Students will be evaluated on the basis of their ability: 1. To define and discuss general theory, site formation processes, basic archaeological field techniques, and the disciples that contribute to environmental archaeology, particularly as they apply to biological evidence of human/environmental relationships. 2. To define and discuss strengths and weaknesses in the materials, methods, and techniques used in human biology, archaeobotany, and zooarchaeology. 3. To define and discuss the contributions environmental archaeology generally, and each subfield, makes to studies of the relationships between humans and their environments and to the studies of current environmental issues by documenting historical trends. 4. To evaluate professional literature.

SCHEDULE January 7-9: Environmental Archaeology
Reitz and Shackley Chapter 1 January 14-16: Site Formation Processes
Reitz and Shackley Chapter 2 January 21-23: Research Designs and Field Methods
Reitz and Shackley Chapter 3 January 28-30: Biological Classifications and Nomenclature
Reitz and Shackley Chapter 4 February 4-6: Sediments and Soils
Reitz and Shackley Chapter 5 February 11-13: Micro-organisms
Reitz and Shackley Chapter 6

-2-
February 18-20: Bryophytes and Vascular Plants Reitz and Shackley Chapter 7
February 25-27: Wood, Wood Charcoal, Stems, Fibers, Leaves, and Roots Reitz and Shackley Chapter 8
March 4-6: Microbotanical Remains Reitz and Shackley Chapter 9
March 10-14: Spring Break March 18-20: Arthropods and Other Invertebrates
Reitz and Shackley Chapter 10 March 25-27: Molluscs and Echinoderms
Reitz and Shackley Chapter 11 April 1-3: Vertebrates
Reitz and Shackley Chapter 12 April 8-10: Stable Isotopes, Elements, and Biomolecules
Reitz and Shackley Chapter 13 April 15-17: Integration
Reitz and Shackley Chapter 14 April 22-24: Case Studies and Conclusion
IMPORTANT DATES Review Papers due: 1/30; 2/20; 3/20; 4/17 Graduate Student Research presentations: Tuesday, April 22 Final Exam: Tuesday, May 6, 3:30-6:306
GRADING Weekly Tests: Undergraduate students: 40%; Graduate students: 20% Undergraduate and Graduate Student Review Papers: 30% Graduate Student Research Paper: 20% Final Exam: 30%
NO MAKE-UP TESTS OR FINAL EXAM WILL BE GIVEN FOR ANY REASON OTHER THAN MEDICAL OR COURT ORDER. REQUESTS FOR A MEDICAL EXCUSE MUST BE ACCOMPANIED BY A DOCTOR'S NOTE. IF YOU HAVE THREE FINALS IN A ROW, YOU MAY RESCHEDULE THE FINAL EXAM.
WEEKLY TESTS Each Tuesday a brief test over the assigned readings for that week will be administered. This is designed to ensure that you have completed the readings for the week before the lectures begin. If you miss Tuesday class, you may not make up the test. Thirteen tests will be administered and the lowest of the 13 scores will be dropped.

-3-
REVIEW PAPERS Both Undergraduate and Graduate students are expected to turn in four two-page review papers on the schedule indicated above. These papers should review an article that has appeared in Journal of Archaeological Science on a topic related to a BIOLOGICAL aspect of environmental archaeology. The first paragraph of each review should summarize the article and the remainder of the paper should evaluate, comment, expand, or critique the article and place it in historical context. A copy of the article should be attached. NO LATE PAPERS WILL BE ACCEPTED; papers will be considered late if not submitted at the beginning of class on the date due. You may not submit these papers electronically, they must be submitted in hard copy format. It is your responsibility to keep track of the due dates.
GRADUATE STUDENT RESEARCH PAPER In addition to the review papers, Graduate students are expected to write a formal research paper and present their paper to the class (no more than a 15 minute summary). The final paper and class presentation combined will constitute 20% of their grade. Graduate students should discuss their paper topic with Dr. Reitz as soon as possible. Graduate student research papers are due on TUESDAY, MAY 6th at the final exam. NO LATE PAPERS WILL BE ACCEPTED.
CLASS ATTENDANCE & PARTICIPATION Attendance: Regular and prompt class attendance is required. Students are expected to attend class and attendance will count in your final grade. Students are allowed FOUR absences, regardless of the reasons for the absence. No distinction is made between excused and unexcused absences and no excuses for absences need be given. Your final numerical grade will be reduced by one point for each absence beyond the permitted four absences, except in the case of extreme medical need requiring complete bed rest (e.g., hospitalization). Medical or other appointments should not be scheduled for the class period. Habitual late arrivals will count as absences. Participation: You are expected to complete class readings and demonstrate your knowledge of those assignments in class.
NOTES University policies: All university policies with regard to withdrawals, academic honesty, etc. will be strictly followed. As a University of Georgia student, you have agreed to abide by the University's academic honesty policy, A Culture of Honesty, and the Student Honor Code. All academic work must meet the standards described in A Culture of Honesty found at: www.uga.edu/honesty. The unattributed quotation or extensive paraphrasing of material not conceived and composed by the student will initiate action in accordance with the University's policies on academic honesty, as outlined in A Culture of Honesty. Lack of knowledge of the academic honesty policy is not a reasonable explanation for a violation. It is your responsibility to be familiar with these policies before performing any academic work. Questions related to course assignments and the academic honesty policy should be directed to the instructor. Syllabus: The course syllabus is a general plan for the course; deviations may be announced in class. Absence from class is not an excuse for being unaware of such changes.

