Lab Instructor: Class time: Office: Office Hours: Email: Course Description: ELC: Grading:
Course Layout:
Course Policies Attendance: Dress-code: Academic Honesty:

KINS 5690L Lab Syllabus
Albi Schifino
Tuesday 5:00-7:00PM
Ramsey Center, Room 109H
By appointment
ags27911@uga.edu
This course consists of hands-on laboratory experiences related to skeletal muscle mitochondria physiology.
Lab Reports will be posted on the lecture 5690 ELC. All prelab quizzes will be posted on the 5690Lab ELC.
Your lab grade will contribute to 20% of the total course grade.
Every lab will be worth a total of 10 points 6 points from the pre-lab quiz 4 points from participation
Pre-Lab Quiz: The pre-lab quizzes will take place during the first 10 minutes of class. Everyone will log into ELC and take the quiz individually. If you are late and miss the quiz: 1st time: I will reopen the quiz, but dock one participation point 2nd time and beyond: I will not re-open the quiz. 0 quiz points for that lab session.
Participation: You will be expected to participate in EVERY lab. This means sharing the lab work amongst group members, not watching one student complete the whole experiment. Additionally, everyone should be discussing the hypothesis and results. Lack of participation, and late arrivals will result in participation points being deducted.
Attendance is mandatory. You may attend the other lab section and make up assignments only with a university excused absence and approval from the instructor. For all other excuses, you will receive NO POINTS for that week's lab.
All students will be expected to participate in the lab, therefore, appropriate lab attire is required. You must wear pants and closed-toed shoes. Shorts and open-toed shoes are not permitted and will result in ALL participation points being deducted.
All academic work must meet the standards contained in "A Culture of Honesty." Each student is responsible to inform themselves about those standards before performing any academic work. Copies of the honor code can be obtained from the Office of the Vice President for Instruction or may be viewed at the following web site: http://www.uga.edu/ovpi/

