Date 16 Aug 18 Aug 20 Aug 23 Aug 25 Aug 27 Aug
30 Aug
01 Sept 03 Sept 06 Sept 08 Sept 10 Sept 13 Sept 15 Sept 17 Sept 20 Sept 22 Sept
24 Sept 27 Sept
29 Sept 01 Oct 04 Oct 06 Oct
08 Oct 11 Oct 13 Oct 15 Oct 18 Oct 20 Oct 22 Oct 25 Oct 27 Oct

Psychology 5750/7750 (Fall 2010) Primate Phylogeny

Irwin Bernstein, Room 602

Class Meets - Monday, Wednesday and Friday Period 5 (12:20-1:10) Psychology Room 426

Topic Science and Systematics What is Taxonomy? Principles of Classification The Species Concept Nomenclature Classification Systems
The Concept of Evolution
Natural and Artificial Selection Genetic and Inclusive Fitness Labor Day Population Genetics Phylogenetic Trees Constructing Phylogenies Measuring Time Definitions What is a Primate Defining by Example
The Primates Are ...? Necessary and Sufficient Universal and Exclusive Primate Adaptation is? Primate Origins What are Lemuriformes? The Tarsier Problem
Malagasy subfossils Paleocene, Proprimates? The Eocene The Prosimian Concept What are Omomyids? New World Primates Monophyletic Origins Old World Anthropoids Part II

Readings None Schultz I, Feagle I Washburn & Harding Watts I, II Fleagle III Napier and Napier Natural History I Napier and Napier Natural History II Simons II Watts V No Class Watts VI Fleagle IX, Simons I Fleagle X Fleagle II Watts, III, IV Fleagle IX Napier and Napier Natural History III, IV Simons IV Look at Napier & Napier Handbook 1-49 Cartmill Simons III Fleagle XI Napier and Napier Natural History V Simons V Fleagle XII Fleagle XIII Fleagle IV None Fleagle V Fleagle XIV Fleagle VI None

31 Oct 01 Nov 03 Nov 05 Nov 08 Nov 10 Nov 12 Nov 15 Nov 17 Nov 19 Nov 22-26 Nov 29 Nov 01 Dec 03 Dec 06 Dec 07 Dec 13 Dec

FALL BREAK Hominoidea The Hominid Concept The Oligocene The Miocene Hominoid radiation The Pliopithecids Great Apes? The Pliocene Cercopithecines & Colobines THANKSGIVING BREAK Bipedeal Primates The Pleistocene Hominid radiation What is a Human? Concepts Final Exam

No Class None Fleagle VIII Fleagle XV Fleagle VII Schultz VI Schultz IX None Fleagle XVI None NO CLASS None Fleagle XVII Fleagle XVIII Watts VII Review 1200

If you do not intend to come to every class and to do all of the assigned readings, this is the wrong class for you. This class should stimulate you to think in new ways and to critically examine ideas and interpretations. Your use of evidence and the logical organization of material will be evaluated rather than the particular theoretical position that you subscribe to. There is a difference between data and theory, logic and assertion. This will be different than many other courses, I hope you enjoy it. Fleagle is our basic text.
Washburn and Harding and Cartmill are reprints outside the door of 602. Please borrow for no more than one hour. Cartmill gives an alternative view to primate origins. Washburn and Harding give the primary view in Physical Anthropology.
The other books are on reserve in the Science Library. Simons assumes that you are familiar with the general topics. If you are, these are excellent summaries. Chapter V is extraordinary well done for malagasy subfossils and evolution of the malagasy prosimians.
Schultz explains basic concepts in an easy to follow way. Watts explains basic concepts in several fields. Napier and Napier's Handbook is a good introduction to the primates. Their Natural History is a popular text introducing you to Primate Systematics.
If you have questions, bring them to class or see me privately, but not in the 30 minutes prior to class.
Please stay with the readings. I will supplement, not repeat your texts. You are expected to be able to discuss the readings on the day assigned. You will be responsible for all materials presented in class whether you were present or not. On tests, all work is to be individual work. When you are allowed to use your notes and textbooks you are still not allowed to consult with anyone on the answers to questions. The code on Academic Honest will be enforced. If you are unsure about any portion of this policy, see me.
Graduate students will be expected to select from a list of reprints to prepare a 15 minute classroom presentation. This is practice for paper presentations at scientific meetings and will not be graded. Undergraduate students may volunteer to do this also.
You will vote on the number and nature of examinations during the first week of classes. Some may be take home and open book examinations. Copying from a source is permissible with proper citation (without citation this is plagiarism). Citations will not substitute for your explanation of what it means in your own words. On take-home exams you may use books, notes or other media but cannot consult with other people in preparing your answers. The answers must be your own. I will take every action possible to deal with less than honorable behavior. On "open book" exams you may look things up on the internet. Beware that many sources on the internet are inaccurate, especially in a technical field. Even if you cite it properly, a wrong answer is still wrong.

