PSYCHOLOGY 5850: Psychopharmacology

Imstractor: Dr. Richard Suplita T.A. Information: Write In Below
Office: 218 Psychology

Office Hours: By Appointment-

Phone: (706) 542-2174 (leave message)

Email: rsuptita@uga.edu

Required Text:

Meyer, J.S. and Quenzer, L.F. (2013). Psychopharmacology: Drugs, the Brain and Behavior (2™ Ed.)
Sunderland, MA: Sinauer Associates, Inc.

Gourse Objectives:

This course investigates the science of how psychoactive substances act to alter the physiology of
the body and brain to change aspects of normal brain function for therapeutic and recreational
purposes. We explore concepts from the fields of neurophysiology, neuroanatomy, and cognitive and
behavior neuroscience and clinical psychology. In addition, we will review historical and recent
developments in the history of United States drug policy. Completion of this course will enhance your
understanding of the physiological dynamics of the brain, particularly as they involve the effects of
psychoactive drugs.

Attendance:

Attendance is expected and missing class too frequently can negatively impact your grade in multiple
ways. | will not provide class materials to students who are absent. If you miss class for any reason,
you should meet with a classmate to discuss what you missed and to get the missed notes. DO NOT
email me if you miss a class and ask me if you missed anything! If extra credit (of any form) is
available on a day you miss, you will not be eligible to make up this credit.

Giassroom Comportment:

Phone and Computer Policies: | only specifically authorize the use of your laptops in my classroom to
take notes. If you want to browse electronic media, please be respectful of your classmates and sit at
the very rear of the auditorium. Ifa particular student’s use of electronic media is repeatedly
disruptive to you or other students, please let me know about it privately, and | will do my best to
address it. | reserve the right to exclude the use of electronic media to any student(s) whe become a
distraction to others.

Glass Credit Breakdown and Policies:

There will be three exams during the course of the semester and a semi-comprehensive final exam
on the date and time indicated by the Registrar. Each exam is worth 25% of your final course grade,
including the final exam. Your score on the first exam may be dropped and replaced by the lowest of
your remaining two exam scores provided that (a) it is above 50%, and (b) the scores on exams 2
and 3 were both higher than the first exam score (thus demonstrating an upward trend in your exam
grades across the semester).

Please note that the final exam may not be exempted under any circumstance, and it may not be
dropped! Be sure that you can take the final on the scheduled date and beginning at the scheduled
time! Exceptions will only be made in the event of University-approved excuses or a valid (signed,
dated, with phone number) physician’s excuse. A family vacation or a cousin’s wedding (or similar) is
not a substantial reason for me to allow you to reschedule your final exam.

A Note about Letters of Reference: Regrettably, | am not able to compiete a letter of
reference for every student who asks. Due to the volume of request, | will write only for students who
have already completed a course with me.

Determining Overall Course Grade:

Your scores will be computed as a percentage and grades assigned as follows:

X> 92 A
90 >X> 92 A-
88>X>90 Bt
82>X> 88 B
80 > X > 82 B-
78 > X> 80 C+
72>X> 78 Cc
70>X> 72 C-
60 >X> 70 D
Below 60 F

Academic Honesty: All academic work must meet the University’s standards contained in "A
Culture of Honesty" found in your student handbooks and which may be accessed online at the
following URL: htto://www.uga.edu/honesty/ahpd/culture_henesty.him. Students are responsible for
informing themselves about those standards before performing any academic work. Academic
dishonesty of any kind, be it plagiarism, cheating, or turning in work submitted for credit in
another course, will not be tolerated! Infractions will be reported to the appropriate authority and
will result, at the very least, in a zero for the assignment.

Students with Disabilities: if any student has circumstances requiring special attention or
accommodation, please contact me as soon as possible. Your information will be held confidential.

Tentative Schedule (Listed on the next page):

The course syllabus is a general plan for the course; deviations announced to the class by the
instructor may be necessary. Be sure to check at least once each week for updates. In no event will
exam dates be advanced (i.e. moved to an EARLIER date}.

Weekday Date What's Happening Chapter(s)

Thu 5Jun Course Introduction and Philosophical Background 1

Fyj 6-Jun No Class, Read Chapters One and Two I
Mon 9-Jun Pharmacology and CNS Basics 2
Tue 40-Jun Pharmacology and CNS Basics 2
Wed 11-Jun Pharmacology and CNS Basics 2->3
Thu 42Jun . Pharmacology and CNS Basics 3

Fri 13-Jun Pharmacology and CNS Basics 3
Mon 16-Jun Pharmacology and CNS Basics 3
Tue 17-jun Pharmacology and CNS Basics 3
Wed 18-Jun Exam 1; Bring Pencils! I thru3
Thu 19-jun Research Methods 4

Fri 20-Jun Research Methods 4
Mon 23-Jun Dopamine 5
Tue 24-Jun Dopamine/Norepinephrine 5
Wed 25-Jun Norepinephrine 5
Thu 26-Jun Serotonin 5

Fri 27-Jun Serotonin/Acetylcholine 6,7
Mon 30-Jun Acetylcholine g
Tue i-Jul Glutamate 8
Wed 2-Jul GABA g
Thu 3-Jul Exam 2; Bring Pencils! 4 thru 8

Fri 4-Jul Independence Day! Happy 238th!
Mon - 7-Jul Alcohol 10
Tue 8-Jul Alcohol and Opiates 11
Wed 9-Jul Opiates i
Thu 10-Jul Psychomotor Stimulants 12

Fri 11-Jul Psychomotor Stimulants 12
Mon 14-Jul Cannabinoids 14
Tue 15-Jui Cannabinoids 14
Wed 16-Jul Exam 3: Bring Pencils! 10 thru 12, 14
Thu 17-Jul Hallucinogens and Dissociatives 15

Fri 18-Jul Hallucinogens and Dissociatives 15
Mon 21-Jul Anabolic Steroids 16
Tue 22-Jul Anxiety and Affect Disorders 18, 19
Wed 23-Jul Anxiety and Affect Disorders 18, 19
Thu 24-Jul Schizophrenia 20

Fri 25-Jul Schizophrenia 20
Vion 28-Jul Drag Addiction 9
Tue 29-Sul Drug Addiction 9
Wed 30-Hul FINAL EXAM: 3:30 Sharp! Regular Room Semi-Comp

