The following statement addresses equity and justice and raises sensitive issues about race, society, and
education:
I know the last several months have been challenging. You have faced many hurdles in your academic and personal lives
due to the pandemic, and you cope with anxiety, chaos, and uncertainty. Ongoing issues of racism, white supremacy, and
police brutality, which have a profound history, have moved to the forefront of national concern. I am appalled that again
unarmed Black and Brown people were killed by police officers who should have protected life. I grieve alongside my Black
and Brown students, colleagues, friends, and family for the current wrongs and the innumerable past injustices both
individual and systemic.
While I hope change will happen on a national level, I will work towards change in the spaces I inhabit and work to
be an ally. One of those spaces is BCMB 3100. I take this moment to let you know that a central commitment of my teaching
is to promote equity and justice in my classroom and among my students. This includes using pedagogies that focus on
student learning, assessing in ways that acknowledge growth and development, making myself available to students,
nurturing a culture of respect in the way we talk and interact, growing in my understanding of systemic racism, working to be
anti-racist, and helping members of the course community learn and grow in anti-racism.
Prior to the current atrocities, I tried to create a learning environment where all students knew they could succeed.
Yet recent events remind me of the urgency of the matter. I will continue to endeavor to move BCMB 3100, UGA, and my
community toward transformative change. I want every one of you to know your value and ability to learn and use
biochemistry and your overall academic education for your own good and the good of your families and communities.
I invite you to share your learning and life experiences with me and to help me make this vision a reality. Thank you for
being my student.