Another atypical dimension to this course that we are trying this year is a form of “contract ungrading”. “Contract ungrading” is an approach where we decenter numerical grades from your learning process. Instead, we create a set of clear standards for any assignment. We give you feedback on any draft of the assignment you complete and, provided you turned in a prior draft on time, you will have the opportunity to revise an assignment up until the final designated deadline. To determine your final grade, we have created a set of contract “criteria”. At the end of the semester, you will tell us what criteria you met and make a case for the grade you believe you deserve. If you complete all the criteria updated August 17, 2022 for a particular grade, you will receive that grade. If you meet criteria across different grades, then you will make a case for why you might deserve a particular grade that can include the +/- system. The goal of this grading system is to remove a focus on points and instead to focus critically on the elements of your assignments that will make them strong and then encouraging you to revise your work. This
approach has been shown to improve student engagement and performance; however, some students may find it stressful. We are trying this out for the first time and we will listen to and address your concerns if you have them.
Late and Missed Assignment Policies: We have provided a calendar of recommended targets for completing work and firm due dates for submitting assignments. For an assignment to be eligible for revision, a complete draft must have been submitted by
the prior due date. There is a coupon that you may use to extend a due date on one set of reading inquiry prompts, project, or essay. You need not provide any explanation or justification for using the coupon. We may need to adjust due dates on some
assignments; however, those would only be extensions of current deadlines. We will not move up the deadline on any assignment.
Missed exams may be made up only with a legitimate, documented excuse or prior rescheduling arrangement with the instructor.