Readiness-to-learn. This semester we are taking an approach to learning that involves 
you preparing for each class period by some combination of reading, videos, and 
podcasts. It is essential to your success in this class that you take this preparation 
seriously. To help motivate you to prepare for class, you will have the opportunity to earn 
7.5% of your grade in the class through readiness-to-learn quizzes. The questions in these 
quizzes focus on fundamental concepts from the readings. They are NOT representative 
of exam questions, which will focus more on application of material than recall. 
The quizzes will cover the material in the required pre-class preparation and must be 
completed by 8:30 on the day they are due. No make-ups will be allowed. You will have 
two attempts at each quiz, although you only need to take the quiz a single time. If you 
complete two attempts at a quiz, your grade will be calculated as the average of the two 
attempts. Your two lowest readiness-to-learn grades of the semester will be dropped. All 
readiness-to-learn quizzes will be listed on the unit calendars. They will occur about once 
per week.
In-class learning assignments. These will be questions we work on in class that require 
you to think deeply about the material, apply concepts to novel scenarios, and to practice 
scientific reasoning skills. Your grade on in-class learning assignments will sometimes be 
based solely on participation, but some activities will also be graded on the basis of 
accuracy. In-class assignments will be available online and due at midnight the following 
day. We anticipate you will generally be able to complete them during class time. There 
will be no make-up in-class learning assignments, regardless of the reason you miss an 
assignment. Late assignments will not be accepted. We understand that sometimes things 
happen that will keep you out of class, so your lowest three in-class learning assignment 
grades will be dropped.
Evaluations. You will complete a few evaluations during the semester. Some will assess 
your knowledge of topics, but will be graded solely on completion. The results of these 
evaluations help us identify and focus on the areas students find most difficult. Other times 
you will complete self-evaluations of your learning or give feedback on the course. You will 
access evaluations through eLC. All evaluations will be listed on the unit calendars
Exams. There are four exams for this course. Three will be given in-class during the 
semester. No make-up exams will be given under any circumstances. All the units build on 

one another, and so exam questions may ask you to make connections across units. All 
exams will be open note and will test your ability to apply concepts to novel scenarios. You 
can drop your lowest exam score, including the final exam. If you are happy with your 
performance at the end of the semester, you may choose not to attend the cumulative final 
exam.